Please.
Hey, members, if we can, uh, come back on the screen,
that'd be great, and we'll invite, uh, John Hall College,
uh, Jennifer Chapman, who's representing them,
um, to the screen.
Welcome, Jim. Um, Jenny, we've got, uh, five minutes
with you this afternoon, uh,
including any time you give us for questions.
Thank you so much for the opportunity
to come and speak today.
Uh, I've been a member of the John Paul College Board for,
um, coming up eight years.
And in that time, we've noticed, uh,
a dramatic shift in the anxiety levels of our students.
And one of the things that has been reported to us a lot
as a component of that has been online bullying.
Uh, we've also had several stand downs of students
that have involved social media use, uh, filming of fights
and putting those online, um, which we see as a huge breach
of privacy, um, of both the, the students
and the school, um,
and putting a permanent record
of a really poor decision online, um, of,
of those students involved.
Um, and we've also noticed, um, uh,
the children of the students
that Anga Tahi finding it much harder
to concentrate, uh, at school.
Uh, the removing
of phones in school has made a huge difference, um,
and that has significantly improved concentration at school.
But we have noticed, um, the ability to stay focused outside
of school, um, is, is not there.
How, how it used to be.
Um, and just a consistent decline in that ability to
regulate emotions, um,
and stay focused on what, what the students are doing.
As a parent myself, uh, I have, um, five daughters
and the eldest is 20,
and she went through John Paul College.
Um, and, you know, we had several instances
of online bullying with her,
and the same with our year 12, uh, daughter.
And just seeing the things that they were exposed to online,
even though we have the security set up at home, um,
just the accidental things that they came across, uh,
that were far beyond what we would be happy
with them being exposed to.
So, uh, as a board at John Paul College, it's something
that we support is banning social media use
for under sixteens and also as a parent, um, I support it.
I'm also a primary school teacher.
I teach year five and six students,
and it has not only I've seen it filtering down further
and further and further to the younger children.
Uh, I've had several
of my students report seeing pornography as nine
and 10 year olds through TikTok
and through social media, um,
and, uh, predatory behavior from adults trying
to have conversations with them,
students having multiple accounts on multiple different
online platforms that their parents don't know about.
And just this huge world that has opened up to them
that they don't have the cognitive maturity to be able
to manage and, uh, what that does
to their mental health and their learning.
Thanks very much. Jenny, you've got a question from Mark.
Uh, thank you Chair. Uh, thank you, Jenny.
Um, I'm just seeing one of your recommendations.
You talk about monitoring and reviewing, um, harms annually.
What are your thoughts around, uh, a regulator,
an independent regulator? I
Think an independent regulator would be great
because, um, then it's someone who's somewhat removed from,
um, either, you know, the parents in the education sector
or from the government who can look at it, uh,
look at all the different angles and,
and see, uh, what's actually going on.
I think it's really vital
that they're also removed from the social media companies.
'cause unfortunately, lots
of the social media companies have influence in things like,
um, like some of the online, um,
counseling services are actually propped up by
and funded by the social media companies, which, you know,
of course, those companies, those online platforms
for counseling aren't gonna support a ban when their funding
comes from, um, meta or the likes.
Thanks so much. Um, Jenny, that's our time
with you, uh, this afternoon.
Appreciate the time you've taken to present on behalf of,
um, John Paul College.
We're now going to kids nanny ca.
Yeah. Nice. Yeah. Welcome.
Um, thank you for presenting to us this morning.
We've got this afternoon rather.
We've got five minutes with you,
including any time for questions.
Alright, thank you Kiara.
Committee members, I am Pak Patel from Kit.
I have 10 years of experience in developing parenting tools.
We are here because we believe technology is about the
source of knowledge and online harm,
but we also believe technologies our most powerful
tool to protect kids.
Kidson use AI
to create a real time privacy respecting safety solutions.
Our WhatsApp sale prevents sextortion before its happen.
Our AI agent analyze apps for hidden danger
and on device protection walks, one gets use a VPN
to bypass traditional filter.
We are not here to advocate off banning technology
or isolating children.
Instead, we believe in a smart, ethical, safe layer
that protects without compromising
children's dignity or freedom.
Here New Zealand have an opportunity
to lead the world in adopting forward thinking tech
power protection models.
Right. Ready for some questions? Great, thanks. Sure.
Yeah. Sorry, I wasn't sure if you were going somewhere
else. Uh, PJI.
So thank you. Can you elaborate on
how Kids Nanny is making it possible,
like creating different layers for protection?
Can you elaborate a bit more on that?
Yeah, sure. See, uh, actually what we are doing,
we are trying to develop the own age AI models,
which have a capability to look at the skin,
what the kids are looking into it, right?
So what, what we are doing,
having a two different approach here, alarming the parents.
And second is blocking what it has means,
which is a sensitive information.
Let's say we have developed the WhatsApp seal, uh,
what it do, it's whenever the kids trying to, uh,
send the picture out of the WhatsApp
and it's not, it's inappropriate.
So right away it just get deleted.
Um, and also the Camera Seal feature.
So whenever the kids are communicating over WhatsApp
to the peer and trying to share any news
or anything, then it,
the communication itself get blocked right away
and all the technologies runs in the device itself.
Yeah. And, and, and,
and in case of screen scanning, what we do, we, we,
we keep scanning the screen
and try to identify the, what the objects
and objects on the screen
and notify to the parents about any bullying
or any, any self harm related incident right away.
I'm just curious to understand a bit more,
you mentioned WhatsApp and, and on WhatsApp, um, again
and again, we see that end to end encryption,
uh, message that comes up.
So how do you, uh, provide that kind of intervention there?
Exactly. So end of the day, WhatsApp also need to, uh,
show the videos on the screen, chats on the screen.
So when you see it on the mobile on age,
you have all the privilege
to see all the con content you are, uh,
we are delivering to the kids.
So in, we, we, we keep constantly looking on the content,
it's the text or video.
And as in whenever a on AI model detect something, it,
it's terminate the communication right away
and delete the messages.
So we are the, uh, first topics kind,
whoever this capability, especially in WhatsApp
to delete the content if it detects any objectable.
So supplementary there, we've heard, um,
earlier in the day that the best, uh, way
of preventing, um,
young New Zealanders seeing content they they shouldn't
is using the device, uh, as the tool.
So essentially that's what you are doing.
This is programmed from a device perspective, not, uh,
through the, the online providers themselves.
Yeah, I mean, that's true because nowadays, I mean, uh,
every, the communication protocols end to an encrypted
and it's almost impossible to being on a network.
It's very hard to detect the content and block it.
So it ha you have to be on the on edge to to,
to protect the kids really,
because in, in, uh, in England, I mean,
it's UK also have the pass the rule about age verification,
but if you see that the VPN usage drastically increase in
kids, then after right?
So means the protection.
They know the way to bypass the stuff, so.
Got it. Yeah. Um, quick final from Vanessa.
What's your subscription model?
How do you, how do you fund your service
and, um, what's the cost to appearance?
Um, we are right now charging $5 a month and, uh, and,
and 35 $50 a year.
Thank you. Yeah.
Thank you very much for taking time
to present this morning.
Um, we're now moving on to our next submitter,
which is Safe Surfer Limited.
Rory, uh, welcome.
We've got five minutes with you, um, this afternoon,
including entire
Questions. Yeah.
Kda, Carl, and, um, committee.
Um, as a father of two young children
and an IT professional, I'm concerned about online safety.
Um, you know, I started Safe Surfer co-founded
it, uh, 10 years ago.
Um, it's a technology company focused in, um,
filtering technology and parental controls.
Last year we released a KidSafe smartphone
in partnership with Samsung.
Um, that out of the box comes without an app store, um,
without a web browser
and basically allows parents to kind
of step up as they need.
Um, I really see it as a pathway to
KidSafe operating systems, which I think is
where we really need to go.
Uh, early this year, I co-authored a report commissioned
by a CC called the Digital Sexual Landscape and Children
and young people in our TRO in New Zealand.
That's this report here. Uh, sorry. You can't see it. Very
Detailed. Yeah.
Thank you very much. Um, uh, yeah,
and it looks at both, uh, the problem and the solutions
and, um, obviously the report's been made public
by a CC through this inquiry.
It's a synthesis of evidence drawn from a number
of international and local research papers, mostly
between 2018 and 2025.
To be blunt, the research found the issue was far worse
and more complex than what I ever imagined.
And I work in this space every day.
If we look at the available data, two thirds
of children interact online daily
with people they don't know.
Despite concerns of online grooming, one in three minors,
nine to 12 years old, have an online sexual interaction.
One in five cases is likely to be with an adult.
The issue of child exploitation online currently traverses
almost every platform from gaming, dating apps,
social media, and every type of technology.
The evidence is all documented,
and every day that this report is not
actioned, children are at risk.
Some of the most alarming
and emerging harm is with generative ai.
With chat GPTI found that research indicated 12%
of user interactions on chat GPT were for sexual role play,
which is its second highest use.
This is according to a meta-analysis study
of 1 million Chat GPT interactions called Wild
Chat with young people.
In particular, an emerging trend that we really need
to be aware of is the creation of synthetic relationships
where they can create chatbot personas for friendship
or fantasy platforms like character AI and replica ai.
At the forefront of this trend
and character, AI has an estimated 20 million active users
globally, half of which are believed to have been under 18.
This was research I did a year ago.
Now we have meta rolling out, uh, AI companions.
We have, uh, less moderated options coming in
through Elon Musk and, um, baby Grok.
And so what we can see is
that ai sexual relationships are not off
limits for these platforms.
They allow not safe for work filters,
and this signals a new kind of abuse, sexual abuse
by AI chat bots.
Conversational AI platforms show
that perpetrators can now be synthetic without any
financial, sexual, or human motive.
AI is moving fast
and my research found a lack of guardrails,
content moderation on AI platforms.
You can consider this as social media 2.0.
We've already moved past, uh,
and fast moving the, um, the tech industry has gone.
Now, as a tech guy, I've looked all over the world at
what kind of technological solutions we can put in place,
and some of these are pretty complex
and hard to understand, so I'm gonna try
and really condense it down.
Um, I've spent the last 10 years developing family filters,
and we know that technology solutions, uh,
provide huge opportunities for young people,
but also pose a massive range of harms including
to their health development, um, even their privacy,
security and safety online.
And while acknowledging the complex holistic solutions
required to mitigate all the risks,
my research really focuses on technology solutions
that pre prevent harms to young people
through harmful content exposure or unsafe design features.
I wrote an entire section on technology solutions,
and I really see the core three core pillars as legislation,
innovation and education.
In order to legislate, we need to get the industry
to adopt safety by design.
Because it's a principles-based approach, there needs
to be some minimum expectations set through codes
of practice and policy across the following areas.
Accountability, transparency, age appropriate,
design default, safe settings, better reporting mechanisms,
child-centered design and privacy protections.
Tech platforms must feel the heavy hand of compliance,
safety, and the need to invest in risk management
that other industries do.
Innovation is currently missing
from the solution equation at the moment.
We can't rely on compliance by tech platforms.
The tech industry is going to be the most hardest
and difficult to regulate,
and it's gonna be a fight of legal departments.
Wraparound services are needed for every New Zealand family,
education and tools, investment in education, research
and technology in a scale we've never seen before.
To solve this problem, effective blocking,
these mechanisms are going to need to play a role.
Currently, there's millions of combinations of apps,
websites, and platforms,
and I believe the only way to address these is with opt-in.
Robust family filters for households and mobiles.
These are effective at reducing sexual content online.
They're also effective at reducing child
sexual abuse material.
Um, and one of the only ways to prevent VPNs is gonna be
through child Safe operating systems.
Um, I can go on,
but I'll leave some time
for questions if we have any. Yeah.
Uh, thanks Rory.
I think you've used all your time, um, okay
with us this afternoon.
Appreciate, uh, the time you've taken
to present to us and your submission. Cool,
Thank you. Thank
you so much. Um, we're now going
to internet New Zealand, um, kta, Anna,
we've got you for 10 minutes this morning
and Vivian, uh, this afternoon,
including any time for questions.
Alright, thank you.
I'm Vivian Maer, born Chief
executive at Internet New Zealand.
Um, just for the committee, uh, so, you know,
we're a community organization that manages the NZ domain,
which is a key part critical infrastructure
of the Internet's technical layer connecting New Zealand
to the worldwide, um, internet.
So we manage the domain name service on path
of all New Zealanders
with support from the New Zealand government.
So, um, what we do is we hold the
register the registry of all the NZ name holders
and ensure that any one of these emails or websites
or other communication, a domain name holder is sending,
gets to the right place in the web.
And vice versa, people trying to find somebody
with a NZ domain accurately finds it.
We don't look at content content
nor can we, based on the information
that we hold in the registry.
And like every other ISP
or internet service provider in New Zealand,
we need an agreed, clear
and transparent basis
for taking action against something that is harmful.
And that basis is a government based regulator
that makes a decision using our laws
that something is illegal,
and if it's on a.nz domain requires us to take it down.
So for us, positive regulation is about setting clear,
smart rules of the road for the digital age.
I actually really like that, um, submission I just heard,
I thought there was some really good, um, elements in
that it's about holding platforms accountable
for the systemic harms.
Their products are designed to create
and empowering New Zealanders with rights and protections.
Um, I think we are still in an age where, um,
people who are in senior political
or managerial roles who weren't born digital, uh, you know,
into into the internet age.
We still think this is a small thing off to the side,
but the sooner we get our heads around the fact that most
of our laws are designed for a pre-internet era
and, um,
and they're not fit for purpose, we really need
to figure out a very comprehensive approach to,
uh, to how we provide protections and reduce harm online.
That's not a sledge hammer
that actually breaks the internet.
So, um, last year
or two years ago now, actually, we did a huge piece of work,
um, at the, at the invitation
of the then labor government on safer online services
and media platforms.
And what the conclusion I came to in doing the research for
that submission is that we can't address 21st century harms
with a 20th century regulatory patchwork.
And we are absolutely quickly lagging
behind international counterparts.
And for that reason, we think we need
to pull together all the bits of the patchwork now, um,
through a dedicated independent digital regulator.
This isn't about creating more bureaucracy,
it's about creating a body with the expertise, agility,
cross agency authority to keep pace
with the actors in the internet focused on harm.
And, and I think, you know, we can't underestimate
how fast it's moving with, with generative AI
and other platforms.
Um, in that submission, you'll see that we designed that
cross agency that that, um,
did independent digital regulator around being te centered
around real transparency, ma mandating public reporting
and real time algorithms
and proper oversight balance by independent,
independent advisory board.
This is about smart precise governance,
not blunt force control, it's solution on harm
farm online that's fit for you New Zealand.
I'm gonna hand over to Anna, who's been working on some
of the international space
and has got a comment on the Australian age assurance
trial. Anna?
Thank you Vivian. Uh, at the time
that we wrote our written submission,
the Australian government hadn't yet
yet published its report on its age assurance trial, uh,
for its version of the youth social media ban.
However, this report is now published
and unfortunately it does confirm our original suspicions.
The trial itself found that errors are inevitable.
17 and 16 year olds would be falsely rejected at high rates
above acceptable levels.
It also highlights increased accuracy issues
for non-Caucasian users, meaning
that technology solutions like this would unfortunately
disproportionately impact Maori and Pacific youth.
Crucially, the trial scope was incredibly limited.
It did not and could not address the massive implementation
issues that we've heard about this morning, such
as VPN workarounds like in the uk, where 68%
of teens use VPNs as well as the privacy risks.
In the Australian trial, one
of the advisors actually resigned warning it would warning
this kind of technology and the trial specifically failed
to properly consider the grave privacy concerns
and collecting this kind of sensitive biometric data.
Austral is appearing to charge ahead
with a ban based on technology
that its own trial shows is not fit for purpose.
And we not, we must not make the same mistake.
Instead of ineffective
and intrusive age, age gates, we must target the root
of the cause, the addictive architecture itself.
We could look to legislate youth specific tech safeguards
like banning addictive design by default for miners.
Without the use of age assurance tech,
we could make these kinds of features an opt-in choice,
not an optout battle.
And we could look to other jurisdictions like
California for inspiration.
We need to empower youth, empower whanau with privacy,
protecting user controlled safety tools,
rather than relying on intrusive, centralized system.
We need to look at regulating the harm engine,
not just the door to it.
We have a choice right now,
given our lag in this regulatory space globally.
We can follow Australia down the path of simplistic,
intrusive, and ineffective bans,
or we can lead with a smarter kiwi approach.
We can build a regulatory framework
that is not only technologically literate, toity centered,
but also rights respecting one of one
that targets the business models of these platforms
and empowers our communities.
It's not time to settle for a bandaid solution, it is time
to build a digital environment that protects our kids
by design and not by accident.
Uh, that concludes our oral submission,
if anyone has any questions.
Thanks very much. Uh, honorable Phil Trafford.
Thank you for the submission.
Um, based on the international experience in places like
Brazil and, and in Europe
and other places, um, what do you think the, um,
prospects are that New Zealand could, uh, actually deal
with the, the inherent business model that's at play here
and get social media companies
and tech companies to make, to change their algorithm,
to make their algorithm, uh, transparent
to implement the kind of, um, controls
that you've suggested?
We are a small player, but we are coming to it once.
A lot of these countries have already established these
legislations, so we essentially can piggyback off some
of the useful legislations
and jump onto what they are doing.
If we don't, we're at a very real risk of a race
to the bottom where platforms will push more
and more in jurisdictions where there is no legislation
that is keeping them under control.
So I think we can use it as a benefit
as opposed to as a risk.
Pardon you Paman. Uh, thank you.
So what does, uh, T 3D uh, centric regulation look like?
It looks like engaging with Maori as a part
of the independent regulator.
And you mentioned about the hate, uh, speech.
Uh, do you think, um, we need more regulations?
How do you define, um, hate, hate speech?
We define hate speech within the current legislations.
The current legislative de definition of hate speech,
we don't necessarily, we are not necessarily here
to discuss whether that needs to be changed,
but with the idea of the independent regulator, you have
that flexibility to maintain pace with the ever,
ever rapidly increasing online environment,
which is why we think it's such a useful tool.
Okay, thanks so much, uh, for taking time
to present to us this afternoon.
And that's all we have time for, uh, this afternoon.
We're now gonna invite, uh, next, uh, submitter on Zoom,
the Interactive Games
and Entertainment Association for 10 minutes.
I think that's Ron Curry. There We are Ron.
Uh, Ron, we've got 10 minutes with you,
including any time for questions far away.
Lovely. Thank you. And thank you, um,
for the committee members, the opportunity to appear today,
um, like said, I'm Ron Curry, I'm the CEO
of the Interactive Games Entertainment Association,
and we're the peak body representing video
games industry in New Zealand.
Um, our members have asked, they include publishers,
distributors, and platform holders that sit behind some
of the most popular and well loved games played
by New Zealanders of all ages.
Um, just for context, video games are now one
of the most accessible and popular forms
of entertainment in New Zealand,
and we know that nearly 80% of all Kiwis are playing
with the average age of 35.
And thankfully almost half of those are women.
Um, really importantly is New Zealand made games
or a global success story,
and they generate around $550 million in export revenue last
year, which outpaces the traditional industries
like wool and steel.
But just as importantly is
as the economic story is the social, the educational
and the wellbeing benefits that games provide.
And Kiwis believe that games help families connect,
support children's learning,
and offer young people spaces
that help them build resilience, help them build creativity
and find social connection.
And increasingly we see video games being used in
therapeutic settings
for helping children regulate their emotion
or to support trauma victims.
And what I want to point out,
and I think's really important are the games are
fundamentally different from some
of the other online platforms.
The core purpose of games is interactive play,
and that's to progress.
It's structured and there's in-game communication,
which is designed to support gameplay rather than more
globally sharing the content,
it's more like a smaller wall garden.
And I'd like to think that our industry takes its
responsibility seriously.
Um, games are classified and age rated,
and our members have a long history of compliance
with the New Zealand Classification Act.
Also as pioneering industry of safety tech.
We invest really heavily in trust
and safety to ensure that players
and particularly young players
and vulnerable players can enjoy a safe
and really positive, um, gaming experience.
And we know from our research
that many Kiwi parents already set up rules
for their children's gameplay
and use the strong parental controls are there
to support parents and caregivers.
So I guess, you know, what we look at is, um,
fairly not simple, but how we encourage government, business
and civil society to work in partnership, um,
to find policies, policies that are evidence-based,
proportionate and aligned with
international Beck's practice.
And I'm hoping that, you know,
this conversation we're all having today can ensure
that we can create a safe online environment
that's both safe but also enjoyable for many kiwis.
Thank you.
Thanks Ra. Questions
And thank you for your submission.
We had a submitter who thought that, um, banning gaming
for under sixteenths is, um,
actually going to be a good idea.
What do you define online?
Like online presence
or online activity in your, sorry, what,
What was the last part of the question?
So we had one submitter who thought that
banning game gaming
for under sixteens is going to be a good idea.
Mm-hmm. So thinking about that,
and you've used this term online quite a few times in your
submission, so want to understand
what does online mean to you?
Because online is social media,
online is gaming online could be able
to put a comment on a Wikipedia,
it could be writing on news site, what
Is Yeah, absolutely. And, and
I think it's really important
that we understand the nuance when we say online,
because, you know,
online could be booking a doctor's appointment, you know,
online could be, you know, talking to your psychologist,
it could be talking to your doctor.
Um, so you, you're right. We, we need to ensure
that we understand the nuance.
For us, it's about, when we talk about online, it's
around playing games in a setting
that connects people over the internet.
And what we see is gaming is fundamentally different
to say social media.
If we look at social media online, uh, we know games are
about play and we know that culture
and connections are built around play.
We have play-based learning.
The first thing we do with our children is we send them
to schools or we teach them at home around play.
Um, and more recently we saw that, uh, UNICEF along
with the QUT
or Queensland University Technology did some research
and it looked at children's wellbeing around playing games
and saw that children elicited competence.
They learned emotional regulation, self-actualization, uh,
empowerment and creativity
and social connection through playing.
Now that play could be in a playground,
but this specific research was about playing
online with each other.
Um, and, and I guess one step further around social media
with games game is the idea.
That's why you're going online.
You're, you're creating an environment between you and one
or few other people to enjoy an experience.
Whereas social media is you are the product, uh,
you are being sold to advertisers,
which is quite the inverse to
what an online game looks like.
Thank you. Francisco Hernandez.
Thank you Chair. Um, I'm curious
to know whether you support better regulation on things
like, uh, loot boxes
and things that kind of replicate the gambling experience,
um, within video games
and potentially create the association, um, you know,
for young people, uh, and encourage in mainstream gambling.
Yeah, look, if we look at the example,
I guess from Australia, um, they use the national Classifi
National Classification Scheme there
to help parents identify games that had loot boxes.
So including, you know, the, including that it was a minimum
of a m classification
and then ensuring that there was an r classification
around simulator gambling.
So certainly we're not opposed to ensuring
that parents are really informed of the content of a game,
so they can help manage their child's access to that
and really understand, you know, what's in a game,
Phil.
Mm-hmm. Um, Ron, what, what kind of things are the,
is the industry doing to, um, protect, uh,
young people specifically from the potential online harm
that that might come to them through being in a, in a game
with adults they don't know in, um, some other part
of the world where the grooming can take place with a, um,
uh, tendency towards gambling through monetization,
through young people, you know, uh, gaming excessive hours
and, and, and addictive behavior at all times of the night.
What, what about those kinds of issues?
Yeah, thanks Phil for that question.
You know, may take me an hour to answer all of that,
but I'll, I'll try to keep it very succinct,
but in the fir first party question,
I'll give an example there.
Um, Roblox, which often, you know, is a subject of a lot
of conversation this week, um, introduced, um,
and I introduced a part of their program that says
what they'll start doing is age
assurance, uh, in their games.
And for example, if you're a 13-year-old, you are,
you are locked to speaking to 13 year olds,
other 13 year olds who they've aged verified,
not people who've claimed to be 13-year-old.
Um, along that also, um, they're using AI to look at
what text messaging looks like.
So, you know, children are smart at trying to get around,
um, words that they can't use.
So the AI is continually trying to learn how kids,
and not just kids, more importantly, people who are,
you know, more interested in predation than playing, um,
and how they're trying to communicate with kids.
Um, if we quickly jump over to content that's,
that's not appropriate, um, all
of the major consoles have parental controls
and games have the classification embedded in them.
So it's automatically reading whether a game is
appropriate for that age.
And it's similar back to Francisco's question
around ensuring that there's appropriate classification
for the content that they're going to play.
So if there's gambling elements in it,
parents should be fully aware of that,
and we don't, we don't step back from that.
I'm not sure whether I missed anything along that question.
I try to keep as succinct as I could, Phil.
I have to supple on that. Yep.
Um, just to supple on that, um, uh, just one
of the questions, uh, Phil asked about mm-hmm.
What about sleep deprivation with kids up all night?
How do you manage that? Yeah, no,
and that, and that is a problem.
We, first off, I'll, I'll point out that we know
that New Zealand kids are playing games for an average
of 97 minutes a day.
Um, so that's the average we have on all
of our parental controls and all of our consoles.
The ability to set up when games can and can't be played.
So you can set time limits,
but you as in the number of minutes
or you can set times, so you're able to tell the console
that this console can't be used after a certain time.
The game is locked down.
And I know that re that relies on parents
to set those controls.
Um, but I'm not sure
how else we turn a game off at a certain hour.
The only country I know that does
that is China turn game all games off.
But we're in a global environment, which I'm,
I guess is difficult to turn games off,
particularly if adults are also playing those
games. But just,
Just, Just, just very quickly, yeah.
How effective has that been in China?
I beg your pardon? How effective has
that been in China?
It's hard to measure anything that comes outta China,
but we know that there's a, a huge VPN use in China around,
um, around accessing both games,
different sorts of games and the times you can play games.
Great. Ji very quick final question very
Quick. So how do you age verify,
uh, um, like a 13-year-old?
Um, generally speaking, it's very difficult
and we're just starting the process.
I know with, um, roadblocks, they're starting
to use 3D imaging, they'll ask a child
to turn the camera on, um,
to ensure they're not holding a photo up, um,
turning their heads around to look at trying
to estimate the age.
Um, also asking parents to ver verify the age.
And what we're doing is very closely looking at what's
happening in the UK around age verification
and what's happening in Australia, and,
and noting Anna from internet, new Zealand's concerned
around age verification.
That's, it's trying to find something that's proportionate
that we can protect children's, but also look after privacy.
And I, I, I think that's, that's something very difficult
that we're all struggling with at the moment.
Thanks very much, Ron. That's all.
We've got time for this afternoon.
Appreciate, uh, you taking, thanks for your time. Bye-bye.
I'm gonna invite, um, Holly, uh,
and Joe from Make Sense up to the table here,
uh, in the select committee room.
And we've got 10 minutes with you this afternoon, including,
um, any time for questions.
Thanks for being here.
Thank you for having us. Uh, ura, my name is Holly Brooker
and I'm here alongside Joe Robertson.
Uh, we represent makes sense.
Um, I'm gonna be really honest.
I have mixed feelings about being here today.
I, you know, it's really encouraging
to have a full day set aside to, um, you know, tackle
online harm and, you know, discuss, um,
or explore measures that could be used to,
to address online harm.
But on the other hand, I feel pretty annoyed, angry.
In the past five years, we've had many inquiries,
research reports, uh, consultations, petitions,
expert recommendations.
We've had ministers travel internationally to see
how other countries address online harm,
yet no action has been taken worse.
We've had promising initiative initiatives scrapped,
we've had digital safety teams reduced,
and we've had piecemeal measures implemented
while young people continue to face harm daily at breakfast,
on the bus, at school,
and on the way home from school at home in their bedrooms.
As you'll know from our submission
and our co-authored a CC commissioned report,
there are four categories of online risks, uh, to children,
content, contact, conduct,
and contract across multiple platforms.
Our recent submission covered, um,
you know, the research on these.
One quick example to bring this research into reality.
Snapchat promised safer teen accounts,
but when we set up account an account as a 13-year-old,
we were instantly prompted to set up, um,
to share our location publicly.
Social media and gaming sites act as storefronts for,
um, pornography.
The porn sites of no age x, Google
and Bing host millions of rape
and BCL videos on the open web.
Predators can can
and do approach children on Roblox discord and Instagram.
New Zealand has some of the highest classroom screen use
in the world yet principals report no national standards on
how to keep children safe.
MOE told us just last week
that school boards are actually responsible
for online safety at school.
But board members are not online safety e experts,
and they aren't given information
or tools they need to address this.
I started my masters on pornography eight years ago,
assessing exploitative and demeaning sexual behaviors
and the impacts on children.
I had three kids at the time and my eldest was four.
I thought this work was meaningful
because it meant that by the time my eldest was a teenager
that we would have significant measures in
place to protect him.
I knew and know what he's coming up against.
The average age of child first sees porn is 12.
Half of what he will see will be ancestral,
A third will be non-consensual.
I didn't want my son to see videos titled she was sleeping
and we all got on top.
I thought it would be different by the time he was 13.
Now he's just shy of 12 and everything is actually worse.
Porn literacy in schools has been rolled back.
There's been an 1800% increase in cases where children
are coerced by predators into creating
and sharing sexual images of themselves.
Online grooming reports on Snapchat increased
550% in New Zealand.
Between 21
and 23 you'll hear familiar arguments against action.
The internet is too big. New Zealand is too small.
Education is the answer.
Young people will get around whatever we do.
Children have rights to digital access
and we should let them guide our decisions.
Just some really high level responses to these.
Privacy must of course be safeguarded,
but it cannot be used as a shield for inaction.
New Zealand is too small if we act alone.
Partnering with other countries is the only answer.
Internet watch, foundation
and NCMEC are existing Examples of this.
Minority groups are often cited as needing social media,
yet research shows that these groups face higher rates
of bullying, hate
and exploitation online with many left vulnerable
to adults exploiting that search for connection.
Most young people actually adapt well
to regulation over time, as we've seen with drinking,
smoking, and driving.
Exceptions will always exist,
but largely compliance grows when they see the
benefits to their wellbeing.
Education is vital,
but on its own, it's not a safety strategy.
Expecting teenagers to bear the burden
of protecting themselves online is not
empowerment, it's abdication.
So we have a piecemeal and reactive legislative
and regulatory approach in New Zealand with a kind
of post harm individual focus on content,
contact and conduct.
We believe that New Zealand needs a streamlined approach,
uh, a national strategy focused on harm prevention
with a multi-agency approach.
A children's online safety act
to address all online harm across all platforms
with clear definitions of harm, enforceable codes, safety
by design standards, a duty of care focus
alongside age limits for sites publishing adult content,
or conduct an independent regulator
with an online safety commissioner to lead the charge
with enforcement powers to hold platforms accountable,
oversee compliance and uh, manage reporting.
And we need robust education for parents, children,
and educators alongside nationwide campaigns
to shift cultural norms just like we did for smoking.
Kia may be brave. And thank you for listening.
We welcome any questions.
Thank you. Yeah, thank you for your submission
and thank you for coming here.
It was, um, curious to understand from you,
how would the band practically work
because, uh, as you would've heard,
we talked about harm going underground, possibility of that.
So how, how do you think we can tackle that? Hmm.
We are not talking just about a ban
and our submission hopefully covers that.
We think that that's one piece of a very big puzzle.
And I think the argument around it going underground,
it's interesting, it's like when people talk about the dark
web as though there were some like hidden corners
of the internet that aren't regulated.
It's all unregulated.
Like it's all open
and available, so there's no underground
it's there accessible.
Now
We also, we also know that young people aren't, um,
talking to their parents about the harm
that they experience online.
So we don't believe that, you know, an age limit is gonna,
um, change that.
We've already got issues with that. Mm-hmm.
Um, Ruben. Oh, alright. It's alright.
Yeah, thank you. Look, just, just to, um, thank you for
that, your presentation.
Really, really good stuff in there.
And just to pick up on the,
I guess a sub off the question from Palm G to around a ban
or not a ban, um, I'm, am I right in thinking
what you are, you are, you are talking about
much greater levels of regulation
and potentially a ban as something
that's used in the short term
until the environment is safer?
It could be. Um, I I mean I think we'd need really strong
evidence that some, a social media company, for example,
is interested in safety.
Um, we've not seen that to date,
but yes, we are advocating for something much broader
that's really agile.
And this is a key piece here is
that you need an independent regulator, not dictated
by government who says, okay,
now we have this emerging trend
and how are we gonna respond to that?
So social media age restriction. Yes.
And then let's see
what the industry does and respond to that.
At the moment we take about 20 years to respond to anything,
and that's unacceptable.
I wanna go, um, back to something you, you said Holly,
I think earlier when you spoke about, uh, age,
I don't think you said verification, uh, um,
essentially classification for websites as well.
So I know you spoke about verification,
but did you also indicate that, that you think that, um,
websites should have, you know, like you do on a video?
This is age rated at XI
Was referring to pornography websites.
So we currently don't have any age gating.
We have direct access to, um, to websites.
And in regards to the social media, we believe
that if we can pro, um, delay young people having access
to social media, um, we know that there's all sorts
of harms occurring on social media.
So that would be, um, obviously a, an approach
that we support, but it,
we'd be really concerned if it was just that approach
because that to us is, uh, we,
we don't want a piecemeal approach.
We want a wide ranging online safety
that incorporates that within.
I appreciate that point. So just on the, um,
age verification, you were talking about pornography sites
only, or did you have other sites in
mind where that could apply?
I mean, I think we've seen harm occur, for example,
and Gore sites.
Um, you know, it could be a whole range of content, like,
you know, how to make a bomb.
You know, that's really quite critical information
that we wanna at least send warnings about.
Right.
Got it. Thank you. Um, Phil Trafford.
Yeah, I appreciate, uh, you are advocating for kind
of a system-wide approach
and kind of infrastructure for managing this,
but I'm, I'm curious in the work
that you've done over the years, um, what kind
of importance do you put on the idea of sort
of full frontal regulation of the social media companies
and the internet service providers?
Yeah, we How much Yeah,
Yeah, we, sorry, go on.
We believe that, um, regulation of social media
companies is a primary importance.
They've had free for all for so many years,
and we have many years of evidence now showing
that there is harm occurring.
Uh, and we, they, you can have a completely, um,
unregulated environment to operate in here.
And we're seeing other countries internationally, uh,
taking steps to mitigate that.
And we'd like to see that happening in New Zealand for sure.
We, I mean, you know, that we've been,
we've done run a petition
around illegal sexual content mm-hmm.
Rape. We are not even addressing
illegal content in New Zealand.
Mm-hmm. So there's a lot of work to do.
Sure. Thank you. Yeah. Uh, thank you.
So how do you define social media?
Yeah, so we usually, social media is based on
user generated content.
So a platform where the users determine what's on it,
where they can create content and then upload it.
So that's where YouTube is.
It is a social media platform
and that's why Australia has included it.
So Thank you. So do, would you include something like, um,
a group form to, um, message each other
or a news site where you can come
and comment that kind of interaction that happens?
No. So they're direct messaging platforms, so,
and we think that there's lots
of safe options there for kids.
I mean, I don't think anybody's recommending
that kids can't communicate with each other.
Um, I think that we are, we are talking about the way
that adults as well can access children
on social media sites.
Okay. Thank you so much.
Really appreciate you coming down, uh, to Wellington
for this face to face
and appreciate your input in the work you've done
in the space over a number of years.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, we are now going to the National Council
of Women, um, online.
Yeah. Got it. Eva.
Um, and is Sue joining us, um, as well?
She is, I think, is she online?
Uh, there we go. Yeah. Okay.
So we've got five minutes with you, uh, this afternoon.
So hand over to you, um, including any time for questions.
Lovely. Thank you. Um, the National Council of Women,
uh, is an umbrella group representing
around 60 affiliated organizations
and 300 individual members.
Um, we've really come out of the suffrage movement
and the suffrage, and collectively our reach is over 200,000
with many of our membership
organizations representing all genders.
Online safety, including Safety for Women
and Children, is a key concern
for National Council of Women and its members.
Um, and in our written submission, you'll see
that we draw on the priority policy work at the Online
Safety Coalition convened by NCW has developed.
And it's based on evidence of harm
and international best practice.
Um, and writing our submission.
We've drawn on the long history of commitment
to eliminating all forms of violence against women
and children and striving for gender equal.
Um, I just wanna say at the outset as well
that we appreciate Minister Stanford's leadership
and the committee's engagement
with the public in this important inquiry.
And we welcome the opportunity to make a submission.
Um, really the key points we wanna emphasize is
that the starting point needs to be
that everyone deserves to be safe online.
Uh, but currently everyone is impacted
by the unregulated online environment in New Zealand.
While children have particular vulnerabilities
and sensitivities in the online environment that need
to be recognized in legislation,
they're not the only group affected.
And we need to ensure that everyone benefits from new laws
regulating the online environment.
Uh, we're particularly concerned about
how it gets weaponized against different groups in society,
including women and girls.
Um, we are concerned that social media
and online platforms are increasingly used
to spread misogyny, racism, dangerous disinformation,
and other harmful content, violent online content such
as the abuse of women and children, suicide
and self-harm, terrorism
and extremism, which is readily available
to ordinary New Zealanders who are invited
to view and share this content.
Um, where people with a public profile, particularly women,
have become increasingly targets for online hate campaigns,
including death threats and threats of sexual violence,
threats to their families
and distribution of dangerous disinformation.
This is, at times escalated into violent extremism,
which has a significant negative impact on individuals,
their families and communities, threatening the human rights
of the individuals who are harmed, including the right
to safety to participate in public life
and freedom of expression.
Um, in this submission,
we've really highlighted some key risks for children
and young people, uh, from the online environment,
including mental health, ative conditioning
and addiction, grooming
and radicalization, technology facilitated gender-based
violence, uh, exposure to illegal and other harmful content.
And the permanence of content created in shared online.
We're concerned like the previous
submitters and many others.
I know that the committee you'll be hearing from
that digital tech companies are doing very little to prevent
or respond to their online harm
and the abuse that appears on their platforms.
They're not responsive complaints systems, they're not, um,
required to do risk assessments.
They're not required to have independent audits.
There's no transparency requirements, um,
about the algorithms or the processes on their platforms.
And our current outdated laws
and regulatory settings are completely ineffective at
addressing these problems at a system level.
Under our present law, the owners of search engines,
social media, video sharing platforms such as Meta, TikTok,
and Alphabet, are not liable for the content
that appears on their platforms.
They're also not required to be transparent
or accountable for the how they produce
or even to respond to complaints internationally.
Australia, the uk
and all of the eu, including small countries the size
of New Zealand, have legislated to set out a set of safety
and transparency duties for tech platforms
with serious consequences for failing to comply.
We know, and we believe
that New Zealand should follow their example
and introduce legislation requiring digital tech companies
to ensure the safety of their products
and services like any other company, the availability
of accessible and responsive complaints systems
and consequences for people who deliberately spread illegal
and other harmful content risk assessments,
independent audits, responsive
and accessible compliance systems
and specific safety duties, including for children
and other targeted groups are essential.
Um, are there any questions at this stage
or, I, I can keep talking.
Uh, you've only got a very short time left.
Um, Eva, so maybe just, uh,
round off your submission if you'll,
Yeah. So did you wanna
add anything to that?
Um, well maybe I, I just want to, um, stress some
of those key points that it isn't
only under 16 year olds obviously being harmed,
uh, by social media.
You know, it's ordinary everyday New Zealand is being, uh,
harmed in all the ways that you've been listening to.
But the only other point I'd like to highlight is that the,
this extraordinary exemption in our law,
I believe it is in the telecommunications act,
which stipulates that social media companies are not liable
for any content that appears on their platforms.
No wonder there is no incentive
for social media companies to do anything.
And if any of you have read Sarah when Williams book about,
um, social, uh, media, that New Zealand woman, uh,
who did the expose of, um, Facebook,
she really makes the point
that those companies which regulate those countries,
which regulated did, did result in, uh,
Google and others and Facebook taking action.
But in those companies which continue
to have this exemption, uh, they did absolutely nothing.
So I think it's that we remove that, uh, exemption
and that we do regulate.
Thank you so much. That's all we've
got time for with you this afternoon.
Thank you time for taking to present to the committee.
Now I gonna invite the New Zealand business
and professional woman, uh, incorporated on vu.
Yep. All right. And we've, we have them for five minutes.
If you can turn on your mic
and your video, that'd be appreciated.
Kia. Hi. You go. Hi. Hi, Vicky Kiata.
Um, thanks for joining us.
We've got five minutes with you, um,
including any time for questions.
Actually, it's Cheryl Markey Brooks, who's speaking.
I can see she's joined.
Oh, right. Okay. Here we go. Koto.
My name's Cheryl Markie Brooks. Uh, can we just
Ask you to turn your camera on please, Cheryl? Yep.
I've just got we go now. Thank you. Great.
Um, I'm the Vice President of Business
and Professional Women,
and we are a volunteer non-profit organization
that advocates for gender equality
and the empowerment of women in business
and leadership roles within New Zealand.
As part of the International Federation of Business
and Professional Women, the organization works
to improve the status of women through advocacy, education,
and providing network and personal
development opportunities.
So, BPW New Zealand's been concerned about online safety
for a really long time back in 2014.
So 10 years ago, we supported the digital
communications bill asking for stronger protections
for women and young people.
And since then, we've built on that network with a number
of policies all pointing to the same issue, the risks
that New Zealanders face just
by being part of the online world.
So for women and children in particular,
the internet can be a space of real harm, whether
that's bullying, exploitation, or unsafe content.
And we wanna see stronger steps taken so
that the online environment is safe, fear and supportive.
Everyone. So a 16-year-old girl became the target
of a relentless bullying on social media
after falling out with some friends at school.
And what began with a few hurtful comments quickly
escalated into daily abuse.
She was tagged in cruel posts, mocked in group chats,
and told repeatedly that she was worthless
and better off dead
because the abuse followed her home through her phone.
There was no safe place to escape.
Her parents noticed her becoming withdrawn, skipping meals,
and avoiding school one night, overwhelmed
and feeling that the abuse would never stop.
She attempted to take her own life.
Thankfully, a family member found her in time
and she was rushed to hospital.
The experience was devastating for her and her family.
So with counseling finally, and some strong support
and a change of school, she slowly began to heal.
But the scar still, she struggles with self-confidence,
is cautious about making new friends
and still fears online spaces.
Her parents have since spoken out publicly, calling
for strong accountability for social media companies
and better protection for young people.
So our online platforms have huge influence over
what we see, what information spreads
and how people connect.
Yet most of this happens out of sight
with little explanation of how decisions are made,
how ads reach us, or how harmful content is handled.
This lack of transparency puts women,
children in vulnerable communities at greater risk of abuse,
exploitation, and misinformation, stronger rules
and needed to make sure
that platforms are open about their systems accountability
for their decisions, and consistent
in protecting people's safety.
So I just wanna take a couple of, um, uh, issues
around algorithms.
So social media on online platforms use algorithms to decide
what shows up in your feed.
So at the moment, they're a black box
and we don't really know how they work.
So PLA platforms should be required
to explain an everyday language, how these systems rank
and recommend content.
And people should be given a choice to switch off algorithms
and simply see posts in time order so
that we aren't rushed towards content
that we didn't actually choose.
Independent experts, I agree with some
of the previous speakers, should be allowed
to check these systems
and see whether that are pushing harmful content like
bullying, abuse,
or misinformation along
with advertising online advertisements often hidden
or it's hard to trace
and we don't always know who paid for it,
how we were target, and how many people saw it.
So platforms should have to provide a clear public record
of all ads, including who funded them,
what groups they targeted, and how long they ran.
Every ad should be clearly labeled
so users can tell the difference between normal content
and paid promotions.
Some targeting practices should be banned,
especially when they take advantage of vulnerable children.
Teenagers and women experiencing harm rules
and enforcement platforms all have rules about harmful
content, but too often these are applied inconsistently
or without enough urgency.
So the government could require platforms
to publish regular transparency reports,
and these would show how many harmful posts were reported,
how quickly the platform responded,
and where the mistakes were made.
Enforcement must be fair, same rules should apply
to everyone no matter their status, power, or influence.
And finally, there should be an independent complaint system
outside of the platforms themselves.
This gives people a fair pathway if they believe harmful
content hasn't been dealt with properly.
So in conclusion, we urge the government
to require online platforms to be transparent,
accountable, and fair.
Platforms must clearly explain how their algorithms work,
make advertising visible and safe
and enforce rules consistently.
Independent oversight in a reliable complaint system are
essential in protecting women, children,
and all users from online harm.
That thank you. Transparency isn't, isn't about information,
it's about safety, fairness, and trust.
Thank you, Cheryl. Um, that's all.
We've got time for this afternoon.
Appreciate the time for taking to present to the committee.
Thank you very much. Thank you, Phil.
Now I'm gonna invite collective shout, um, to join us.
We've got five minutes with them this afternoon,
uh, online as well.
Yep. I think it's Melinda.
There we go. Thanks, uh, Melinda, we've got five minutes
with you this afternoon, um, including any time
for questions over to you.
Well, thanks for the opportunity to contribute
to Melinda Tankard Reese.
I'm the movement director for a collective shout
for a world free of sex exploitation.
I'm an author and a speaker in schools.
The porn industry is significantly responsible
for the harmful sexual socialization of a generation
of young people.
The world's largest department of education has contributed
to rising rates of violence against women,
harmful sexual behaviors,
peer on peer sexual abuse at levels.
Never before seen a generation of boys exposed to rape porn,
sadism, torture, incest porn at the click of a button.
The French equality watchdog found 90%
of pornography features violence against women with much
of it amounting to torture.
Boys have learned to be aroused by depictions
of brutality and raw cruelty.
30 to 60% of all incidents of childhood sexual abuse
are carried out by other children and young people.
Data from the landmark Australian child maltreatment study
states, quote, in contemporary Australian society,
child sexual abuse by known adolescents is
by far the single most common category of offending.
Professor Michael Salter of the Child of Child Light says,
the widespread availability of pornography appears
to be driving the increased perpetration of sexual violence
by children, particularly boys
Girls report routine sexual harassment
and abuse by male students touching rape threats,
sexual bullying, body shaming, sexual moaning,
and sexual gestures, and trying to choke them.
Boys are commonly sharing pornography at schools,
airdropping it to kids on the school bus,
and sending girls live masturbation videos.
79.9%
of teachers report seeing more sexualized behaviors in
schools from as young as year two,
including children simulating sex acts on other children
as documented in our sexual harassment of teachers report.
Uh, published in conjunction with, uh,
Maggie Dent collective shout
and parenting author Maggie Dent.
Based on a survey of a thousand teachers,
many teachers identified pornography exposure
as a significant driver
of the rise in harmful sexual behaviors in schools.
One said, I believe there is an increasing disconnect
between women as human beings and women as objects.
And I attribute this corrosion of respectful
and boundary driven relationships to unfettered access
to pornography.
Social media was also identified as a key driver
of these behaviors.
One teacher said that it was the number one behavioral issue
in year seven.
These mega corporations have facilitated
and enabled predatory
and grooming behaviors, sexualization, ization,
and sexual harassment directed at minors.
The big tech companies have failed
to exercise corporate social responsibility.
We urge you to use every lever your disposal
to ameliorate these harms.
Uh, we must stop putting the vested interests
of the porn industry
and the the big tech platforms ahead
of the welfare of children.
Uh, failure to do so will mean more, uh,
child on child sexual abuse, more sexual aggression,
more sexual harassment, and more violence against women.
Thank you.
Thank you, Melinda.
Uh, are there any questions from the committee?
No, thank you, Melinda.
I appreciate the time you've taken
to this, um, this afternoon.
We're gonna move on to our next, uh,
Can I just mention very quickly, uh, we
of course have just got the results in here in Australia on
our age verification trial.
Yes. And you might wanna have a look at,
at that, that report.
It's just, just come out, uh, last week.
And, uh, we also supported raising age of access to 16
for social media.
And you can read our submissions, uh, on that
as well on our website.
Thank you very much. Appreciate this time.
Pleasure. Thank you. Now I'm gonna go to, um,
inside out, uh, who are with us in the room.
Are they on Zoom?
Sorry, I've got lots of these throwing has been in the room.
Yes. No, that's right. Um, okay,
so on Zoom, ah, there we go.
We've got five minutes with you this afternoon,
including any time for questions.
The managing director of Inside Out Q.
We are a national charity with a vision to support, uh,
all Rainbow and Taka tapua young people to have a sense
of safety in their schools and communities.
Um, we will just recap a few brief points from our
submission, then open up for questions.
So I'll pass it to my colleague, Valentina.
Kiara. Um, I'm Valentina
and I'm a school's coordinator, um, for Insight Kado, um,
up here in Tamaki Kodo.
Um, and first we want to speak to the importance
of online spaces for young people, as while it is undeniable
that young people do encounter harm online,
it's also important to place this corridor in context.
Um, online spaces are not only sites of risk,
but also essential sources of support, um,
identity development and connection.
To truly reduce harm, we must also recognize
and strengthen the positive role
that these spaces play in the lives of Rainbow Ranata, um,
especially those who are disabled or living rurally.
So, alongside these many benefits, we also do have
to recognize the very real harms, um, rainbow young people
and all young people face online.
So these include cyber bullying, hate speech,
sexual sexual harassment, and grooming.
Rainbow. Young people are more vulnerable to these harms,
especially sexual harms,
because many of them may not be open about their identity
with their family or other trusted adults in their life.
And for those not yet confident
or public in their identities,
encountering hate online may drive them further into self
suppression, isolation, and further risk of self harm.
So creating safe spaces does not mean restricting access,
but rather improving education policy
and the community standards that shape
how people interact online.
Um, so thank you.
And we're happy now to take some questions.
Thanks very much. Um, Francisco,
Uh, thank you Chairman. Thank
you. I'm inside that for the mahi that, uh, you do
and the submission that you gave.
Um, so, you know, taking into account the sort of, um,
potential for harms for, um, you know, rainbow people
and also the benefit it has with community engagement.
Would you still say that overall social media is a net
positive for rainbow people or a net negative?
Um, yeah, totally would be a net positive.
Um, in terms of there are aspects
of social media
and, um, online spaces that can't be replicated
and offline supports.
And because of this, um, yeah, it would be
harmful to avoid the benefits, um, for the sake of something
that doesn't exist offline.
Thanks. Partnership, Pam?
Yeah, thank you. Actually, um, partly you have answered
that, but I'll, uh, if you could elaborate on what kind
of harms do you see, uh, with the ban to, uh,
the, the community, uh, the LGQ BT community,
Uh, Tabby, do you wanna
Yeah, I think, um, the point Valentina was making
before really is that, um, for this specific community
of young people, a lot of them, um, online spaces,
social media, the internet is where they, um,
first reflections of their identity
and others where they're able to connect with others,
particularly for those kind of living in rural areas where,
um, unfortunately we're not yet, you know, kind
of celebrating pride in every corner of roa.
A lot of, um, you know, adults in regional areas move, um,
to the big cities and young people aren't seeing
that modeled or that those access, um,
to community in their spaces all of the time.
So I think, um, yeah, a complete ban would, would be harmful
because it would stop, um,
young people having access to that.
Um, and often that means living, you know, in isolation
or, um, more negative impacts on their mental
health and kind of wellbeing.
Um, yeah, so for us it's really about how do we,
how do we keep, um, keep that access,
but make it a lot, lot safer
because it's a lot of issues with
the way things currently are.
Thanks very much Phil Twyford.
Yeah, thank you for the submission. Really interesting.
Um, so a lot of the discussion that we've been having
and the submissions we've been hearing have really, um,
focused on social media, uh, as essentially defined
by the, the really destructive
and harmful use of algorithms to promote antisocial,
dangerous extremist, uh, content, uh, with the argument that
that's kind of inherent to the business
model of social media.
Um, to what, my question to you is, to what extent would,
would messaging platforms that allow people
to create online communities, um, that are not governed
by an algorithm that's run out of Palo Alto
or, you know, by TikTok
or whatever, to what extent would that meet the needs that,
that you think, uh, the communities that you represent?
Um, yeah. Does, is it any, is that any kind of alternative?
Yeah, I think there's some benefit in that.
Um, one
of the platforms we see very young people
use the most is Discord.
So it's a lot more forum based rather than that algorithm.
And so I think if there was still access to platforms like
that, that would be really positive.
Like there are other ways that, um, yeah,
of course even platforms like that still need, um, yeah,
still need really good safeguarding measures.
However, you kind of need to already sort of,
from my understanding, not as a young person, um, you kind
of need to have already kind of figured things out and,
and know who you are to be able to then join a community
where, where you're gonna find that connection.
Um, whereas I guess a lot more content-based, um,
platforms often help people just kind of curiously search
and, and engage with, with people
that might represent things
that they're questioning or things like them.
Mm-hmm. Thank you very much.
Cool. Thank you Time
that you've given us this afternoon.
We're gonna move on to our next submitter, which is,
let me speak on Zoom.
So if we can invite, um, the Let Me Speak team.
Got Got, yeah, we've got five minutes
with you this afternoon, including
time for question over to you.
Yeah. Um, could we just wait a tiny bit?
There's also someone else who should be
joining us, a panelist as well.
Okay. There we go. Got, yep.
Got it. Do you wanna start? Yep, I'll start.
Sorry, one second. No worries.
I'm so Kiso. I'm Nate Rarick, one of the co-founders
of Let Me Speak, and thank you
for the opportunity to speak today.
Um, in this short time,
I'm just gonna quickly delve into some
of our lived experiences
and then others lived experiences as well as
what we recommend, um, for the Select committee.
Um, so online spaces provide opportunities for young people
to build connections
and things that are not accessible to them.
This is especially prevalent for LGBTQ plus youth,
Ang Tahi in rural areas, or people with disabilities.
Um, it allows them to find communities
and spaces where they can connect with others
that they don't have in real life.
And at the same time, we do recognize the real harm posed
by social media and online harm, whether
that be cyber bullying, harassment, harassment, pornography,
a whole bunch of things that affect youth in,
um, extreme ways.
We, we've seen from studies that over 70%
of some PE young people have faced digital harm online,
and that for one in five, this has directly affected their
relationships, their learning, or their wellbeing.
What we would like to stress though, is
that blanket bans are not the right approach.
We risk cutting off support to the youth
that actually need it, and we urge for approaches that put,
um, youth at the forefront, um, make sure that we have,
um, input from parents and from teachers
and from other groups, and most importantly,
to hold these tech companies to account,
as others have said throughout this, to make sure
that these tech companies are actually being held
accountable for some of the
online harm that's pushed through.
Um, I'll just hand it over to Chanel. Oh yeah.
So, you know, basically, you know, um, first of all, um,
Kiata and thank you for giving us opportunity
to contribute today to this, uh, submission.
So, you know, um, just basically following up on
what Nate said, you know, as young people,
we recognize the intention behind under 16 man,
and, uh, you know, it sends a pretty clear signal
that harmful products should not be normalized,
um, in our communities.
And that protecting our RAN tahi is a priority.
But, you know, um, while all these restrictions are very
important, you know, we believe
that the lasting change requires something deeper,
which is genuine youth involvement
in shaping these policies.
You know, because, you know, like a, like a ban, this sort
of thing, you know, it may set a boundary,
but it does not answer the why
questions that we all wrestle with.
You know, like for example, why do young people turn
to these products and what alternatives exist for them?
You know, uh, if policies are created without those
perspectives, um, there's a real risk
of them becoming disconnected from
how young people actually live their lives.
And we also want to acknowledge the issue of equity.
You know, um, in communities like South
and East Oakland where enforcement is already felt more
heavily, bans can sometimes translate into unequal outcomes.
If this policy is to succeed, you know,
I believe it should be backed with education,
the support systems and community led solutions,
and not just restrictions, you know,
otherwise the danger is
that the behavior is pushed underground rather
than genuinely reduced.
So, you know, we think that under the,
under 16 ban is a valuable step,
but it must be paired with these two things,
which is obviously meaningful youth consultation
and focus on education and alternatives.
You know, that way this policy isn't just regulating young
people, it's actually empower us to make better choices.
So, um, thank you.
And if you have any questions, please do ask me or na.
Thank You. So, um, what I'm hearing from you is just
that the risk is there
and the same level of risk the L-G-B-T-Q community
and neurodivergent communities also exposed to,
but the benefits outweigh the risk.
Um, I'll just T LGBTQ and NeuroD divergent community
and, uh, disabled community.
Would that be the correct conclusion from your submission?
Um, I'll just take the
Benefits are more than the risks.
I would just take that question.
Um, we believe there's extreme benefits to social media
for these youth, and we believe there is harm there.
However, we believe that yes,
these benefits overall do outweigh the harm
and especially we want to push for solutions
that focus on education, that focus on combining
with schools, with communities, with whanau, so
that we actually solve the problem at its root issue,
why people are turning to these rather than, um,
directly going for blanket bands which have
shown not to be effective.
Yeah. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you very much. Uh, that's all we've got time
for with you, uh, this afternoon.
Appreciate the time you've taken present
to the big committee inquiry.
Um, now I've gonna invite online safety,
um, via Zoom,
Kiata, Kiara, right.
Just waiting for you to turn a camera on. There we go.
No, there we go. Great.
Um, we've got five minutes with you this afternoon,
including any time for questions over to you.
I'm the lead technician
for the Tata Online Safety Iwi Leaders Group within the
National Iwi Chairs Forum and the Kai Maori with net.
I'm here today, uh,
because our Tam ran Maori deserve to be safe
and thriving online.
Um, and this Kapa is by professional and deeply personal
because their safety is tied to the future of our w iwi.
And I'd like to say listening to the two ran tahi that spoke
before, I, um, endorse the Accordo as well.
Online harm reflects wider inequities.
Tam are overexposed to racism, misogyny,
and algorithmic bias and AI driven harms.
Yet Maori voices are absent from the design
and governance of online safety systems
must be a cornerstone of digital regulation without
in shaping protective systems,
the inequities our young people face will only deepen.
Through our online, uh, safety eco system mapping program,
uh, project, which is due to wrap up at the end of the year,
we've already seen concerning patterns.
Young Maori don't have culturally safe ways to report
or seek address when harmed online Maori identity
and imagery are being misused,
including an AI generated pornography, uh,
which the tech companies need
to be held more responsible for.
The tahi are excluded from national tech regulation
conversations, even though they carry the greatest burden.
These are not abstract issues.
They're daily realities shaping
how our young people see themselves and their futures.
I also want to raise a deeply concerning trend, the role
of organized criminal groups in online child exploitation.
International evidence shows gangs driving sex,
sex exploitation schemes in creating markets
for child sexual abuse material
where cases have been more than doubled globally in just one
year with devastating outcomes.
International law enforcement agencies are also warning
about online gangs of young men sharing misogynist violent
and abusive content, coercing peers into harm.
Unfortunately, these patterns are now emerging here in ro
feeding into a growing market for child pornography.
It highlights where our systems must respond not only
to individual harms,
but also to organize profit driven exploitation
that directly endangers Maori tam.
We need urgent, practical change in our highlight four
priorities, co-governance and online safety.
We need Maori leadership
to be embedded alongside organizations like Neat, safe,
and statutory agencies.
With ran tahi voices at the table, we need
to upgrade the Harmful Digital Communications Act.
So it responds to AI harms coercive, deep fakes
and impersonation of Maori.
We need to fund Kapa Maori tools
and services, digital literacy resources in re Maori
and Maori led the therapeutic and legal supports for whanau.
And we need to invest smarter,
use a harm reduction problem orientated framework
to target clusters of harm, Maori hardest misogyny,
racial bias, and digital exclusion.
Finally, I wanna stress that the digital
frontier is not just a space of risk
as those young people um, mentioned earlier.
It also is a space of innovation and opportunity.
Maori are natural innovators
and have always adopted new technologies
for the benefit of our people.
But without proper guardrails, governance,
and resourcing, we risk repeating old patterns
where we are continually disenfranchised,
excluded from the benefits while carrying the greatest
burdens of harm.
The decisions made now would determine whether this stage
tour age empowers Maori, ran tahi,
or further marginalizes them.
Our TAM are not just digital consumers,
they are future cultural bearers, innovators
and leaders of this country.
Safe digital futures will not be possible without Maori
leadership ran voices and crown accountability under,
or they are in our inherited treasures,
and they deserve systems that protect their mana identity
and put potential open to any questions.
Thank you so much. That was perfectly timed.
Um, so that's all. We've got time for this afternoon.
Appreciate you taking the time to present to the committee.
Could I just make one last comment? Sorry, quickly. Yeah.
In terms of imposing a social policy, I want
to reiterate what happened.
Um, with the changes in driver's licensing
that was introduced in the nineties with the intent
to reduce the number
of young people being killed on our road,
it also became the leading cause
for young Maori men to end up in prison.
So think seriously about imposing social policy on, uh,
a national, uh, for, as a reactionary thing,
rather than including the voices that are important. Kia.
Thank you, Kiara. Have a good afternoon.
Um, if I can introduce
or invite rather smartphone free childhood nz who are here
with us, um, to the table, that'd be appreciated.
We've got five minutes with you this afternoon, um,
including any time for question.
Good afternoon. Uh, my name is Katrina Colombier,
co-founder and director
of Smartphone Free Childhood New Zealand, a former design
and technology teacher.
This is Kate Fairfax, our capacity building lead
with a background in anti-trafficking sector.
And this is Nicholas Popplewell, our youth governance lead.
We are a new grassroots
and parent-led organization connected to over 2000 parents.
We educate, support,
and support parents to delay smartphone ownership
and social media until children are developmentally ready.
We are part of a rapidly growing global movement,
which was started last year and is now in 30 countries.
Since our written submission,
we've launched a national parent pact
and a parent voice survey.
We are very concerned about the harms to children
from a play-based childhood to a screen-based childhood.
We are also hearing from parents about the harms
to caregiver wellbeing
and the quality of family life from screen addiction
and the task of trying to keep children safe online.
Kiara, just a clarification.
It's a shift from a play-based
childhood to a screen-based childhood.
So parents are taking action on smartphones
because of their risks to children from screen
addiction and online harm.
And we think you've got a lot of data in front of you about
that, so we won't repeat that here.
But there are some features about smartphones
that make them particularly problematic for young children.
They're portable, they're very powerful,
and they often have an unnecessary level
of tech that younger children.
Uh, for younger children, we
promote the use of basic phones.
We're not anti-tech. We think children have a right
to communicate and express themselves,
but we promote phones that don't have internet access.
And in New Zealand, the average age
that children get a smartphone is 11.
When they go to intermediate school, parents tell,
they tell us they feel very pressured to get one.
They don't feel they can say no very easily.
And if they decide to get one,
it's very hard to reverse the decision.
They feel the use of devices in schools from the age of five
and the gamification of education normalizes device use
and gaming from a young age, which leads to a kind
of a taken a given that a smartphone is a normal type
of phone that a child should have.
They talk about the, the, those issues relate
to bring your own device schools, apple Schools,
technology schools that require ownership.
A state of the nation survey in 2022 found
that technology use was the number one worry
for 70% of families.
And in our own survey, we find that, uh,
almost half are very worried about their children
having their own device.
Sorry, that wasn't our survey, that was their survey.
We wanna change this, this norm of smartphone ownership
for children and shift the policy conversation from harm
minimization to harm prevention.
We are providing parents with a tool to prevent harm
through our parent pact, where parents commit
to delaying smartphone ownership to at least 14, 15 or 16
and social media access to 16.
In the UK they've got a similar pact that's been signed
by over a hundred, or it's protecting over 155,000 children.
That's happened in just one year. And just one week.
We've had almost 400 children signed up to our pact.
We believe there's a great demand for that.
We also mobilize parents locally
through our school parent ambassador program.
And the idea of this is that we get a lot of, uh, parents
to sign up in a local area so children can go through school
with a growing cohort of peers
who also don't have a smartphone.
And we support h limits for social media
as another prevention tool in the same way
that we have legal age thresholds
for other activities that can harm young people.
And you've heard a lot of evidence about that.
We often hear about what parents should do
to manage online risks,
but parents tell us they don't always have the resources,
the digital liter literacy or the confidence to do so.
Three quarters of parents in our survey said
that managing digital tech
and screen time is causing stress in their family.
And the state of the nation survey in 20 22, 1 fifth
of family said it was causing conflict.
This obviously can be harder for families
with more than one child with neurodiversity,
sole parents and so forth.
Parents need more tools to navigate what they describe
as a kind of digital or a tech tsunami
that starts very young sometimes in preschool.
It's so fast moving, it's interconnected, it's complex,
they just can't keep up with it.
Parents have said they feel hassled for devices, gaming,
screen time, and apps by children of all ages.
They've told us about children who want to stop scrolling,
but they can't because of persuasive design.
Children who are choosing to live with the separated parent
that gives them the most digital access or a smartphone
and parents having to lock smartphones and devices in a safe
because of screen addiction.
Screen time is becoming a dominant form
of currency in many family reward systems,
and it's even used at school.
Parents tell us they don't feel able
to reverse the decision to buy a smartphone.
Parents also have to try
and keep their children safe at other people's
houses and in public spaces.
We've heard of harms via smartphones at play, dates
and sleepovers when other parents are in charge.
Under tens have been accessing gaming on display smartphones
at at retail stores.
Two thirds of our parents feel
that their school isn't doing enough
to keep their children safe either.
A school phone ban is in place,
but harmful content is also being accessed on
Chromebooks and laptops.
School firewalls are not up to the job.
A small example we heard involved an 8-year-old
who accessed a video about nuclear bombs on a school tablet
while they were researching natural
disasters due to the algorithms.
So I'm gonna have to ask you to round up your thank you.
Um, submission. We moved
To Nicholas. Um,
growing up my parents had to go
to extraordinary lengths to keep me
to manage my online safety.
My dad worked in tech. It gave me, gave us a, a good chance
to be able to restrict.
He did so much, so many different ways to do it at school.
It's not easy. There are blockers in
place, but kids are smart.
They find ways around it. I know the battle personally.
I went through times where my phone was taken.
I didn't have a phone even at boarding school,
and I was the most productive when I had a Nokia.
Uh, when we talk about online harm, people think
of the harmful content, but it's more than that.
It's the constant notifications.
Kids are being chronically online from such a young age,
and that's why government support is vital.
Schools don't have the power
and the average parent doesn't have the power to be able
to compete with billion dollar companies.
Thank you very much for your time. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much for your time.
Appreciate you coming, uh,
in person to present the committee.
Thank you. Thank you. Now moving to Gen Z, uh, in person.
Um, thanks for joining us.
We've got five minutes with you this afternoon,
including time for questions. Thank you.
Uh, Kia Lola,
I'm here representing Gen Z.
Before I begin, I want to express our broad support
for the submissions presented, uh, to this committee
by Youth line NetSafe.
Man, let me speak
and to, I will take our written submission as read
and I'll present three minutes,
and then I'm happy to take questions.
Let me tell you a story of hope.
When I was 13 years old, I started a youth run media outlet.
And over the next few years of my life, I worked
with more than 150 young people hearing thousands
upon thousands of stories.
One young person we worked with had severe OCD
and couldn't leave their house,
and they found a safe community online
where they felt seen and understood.
For them, learning and connecting online was a lifeline
because it gave them a space for belonging.
I have heard so many stories from young people
who have found belonging and identity.
Rainbow youth in rural towns,
disabled young people isolated at home,
migrant young people seeking
connection to their communities.
And as a young person myself, I've grown up in a world
where connection, learning,
and creativity have all been mediated online.
I've learned to lean on the internet as a tool
for creation and innovation.
And my access to the online world has created a lot
of opportunity for me.
Young people will always exist,
and we will always need spaces where we feel safe
and seen and valued.
And the internet is no longer optional.
So we need solutions that center young people's experiences,
uh, create opportunities
for inter intergenerational collaboration, provide guidance
and recognize the really profound online, uh, impact
that online spaces have in our lives.
The internet is not going away anytime soon,
but neither are we as young people.
And so the question is whether you'll choose
to build a digital world that is safe, just
and worthy of the young people growing up inside it.
This concludes my oral
submission. I'm happy to take questions.
Thanks so much, Lola. Um, first question from me.
What do you think is the single most significant thing we
could do to create a safe environment
for young New Zealanders?
I think it starts with facilitating conversations with all
of the stakeholders in this problem.
And that includes the big tech companies.
That includes the decision makers in Parliament.
It includes the young peoples
themselves, teachers and parents.
Because without all of these people in the room together,
we are not creating solutions that, uh,
create positive impact for any of them.
Um, and this whatever outcome, like I don't,
I don't have all the solutions for you,
but whatever outcome comes from those conversations,
I think is is the way forward.
Okay, thank you Pam. Jean, very
Quickly, uh, very nice. We
have listed the benefits of being online, the benefits
of social media, but if you have to compare the risks of,
uh, you know, what we are hearing risks for young people,
um, being online
and kind of, um, that is happening versus the risk of, uh,
a complete ban for under sixteens.
How would you describe those two?
Like different kind of risks?
I think online safety is, uh,
a much bigger conversation than just,
than just the social media ban.
Um, however, uh, there are of course risks
that come with being online.
And I, the reason that I chose to share with you a story
of hope is because you will be hearing many, many scary
and, um, terrifying stories
of the online space for young people.
But I, from what I have experienced there,
there is opportunity for young people
to have lifesaving experiences online.
They can create and innovate
and, um, form friendships and connections.
And this is not to, uh, negate the fact
that they can also do this offline as well.
But both things can be true at once.
Thank you. Um, Catherine, we
Oh, thank you for your submission.
Um, look, I'm quite interested in the points that you make
around, uh, including digital literacy in the curriculum.
Uh, because obviously there's a big education component
to this too, protecting our kids online.
Uh, how would you view that?
I mean, what, what would be,
if you could just elaborate a little further on, uh,
your recommendation there.
Well, yeah, I mean, in the, in the education system,
this is one of the most direct ways
that we can reach young people to support them.
When it comes to being safe online, I think, um, it needs
to include, um, stories from young people around their, um,
experiences keeping themselves safe
and recognizing red flags when it comes to being online.
Uh, we need to start having conversations
with young people at every age, age,
appropriate conversations at every age around, um,
what they should and, um, should not be experiencing
or connecting with online.
Um, because ultimately if we open up the space
for these conversations, if we make it so that they, uh,
feel comfortable and okay
and safe to talk about these things, we, um, it, it,
it mitigates a lot of the risk.
And do you think, just one quick one on that very quickly.
Do you feel that there's not enough happening at the moment
within school and education?
Do you think that it actually needs to be, uh,
embedded in the curriculum?
100%. Thanks so much, Lola. Appreciate you coming down.
I appreciate you person to the committee as well.
Thank you so much. Okay.
We're now I'm gonna invite New Zealand Council
for Civil Liberties, uh, who are also here in person
as I understand it, online.
Online, okay. Um, there we go.
Thomas, uh, we've got you for five minutes this afternoon.
Um, fire away, including time for questions. Thank
You. Good afternoon.
My name's Thomas Beagle.
I'm the chair of the NZ Council for Civil Liberties.
Thanks having me. I see it's been a very long
day of, uh, submissions.
I've only got five minutes. I'll be quite brief.
Thank you. Uh, Our written submission had the
following four major themes.
Firstly and most importantly, access to people
and ideas over the internet is vital
for both our civil liberties and our modern way of life.
And this obviously applies to young people just
as much does to adults.
Any measures we need to take
to protect this should be protecting
it, not interrupting it.
Secondly, this is a major thing of ours.
Internet regulation is really, really hard to get right.
It's hard 'cause people work around it
'cause the big companies are not trust, trustworthy,
worthy 'cause.
Overseas entities don't care for NZ law and
'cause unforeseen consequences are the norm
and not the exception.
Thirdly, the big internet companies have given up on moral
leadership and they lobby on behalf
of their shareholders and no one else.
And finally, there are things we can do
to improve the internet for everyone and not just our youth.
And to tie all these together, I wanna talk about
how I got involved in being politically active,
which was a consequence of the changes
to the Copyright Act in 2009.
And this is where big business is persuaded government,
that they should kick people off the internet, um,
if the big company's accused them
of breaching copyright online.
And this demonstrates a number of the problems.
I referred to one,
the government got suckered basically into passing a
draconian law to suit the interest
of the big media companies.
I mean, the government thought it was doing the right thing,
but they got, they got, they got fooled.
Two, ignoring the complete lack of process for now,
the punishment was overly severe,
taking away an entire family's access to the internet.
And what about school work from home?
Keeping in touch with family,
even in 2009 was obviously over the top
to remove access to the internet.
And it's only got more intertwined into our lives since
three, the use of technology like VPNs
and private trackers made the law easy to circumvent.
It wasn't gonna stop media piracy anyway.
And fourthly, the whole thing became obsolete when the big
media companies such as YouTube, Netflix,
and Spotify started to sell their products online
with companies and became easier
to subscribe than to pirate.
So the law was a classic example
of bad internet regulation done
by politicians who didn't know what they're doing.
We were lucky that was stopped
by a heroic last minute protest.
The law first got delayed and then rewritten.
And I'm asking that you don't fall into the same trap
of repeating these mistakes.
Now we do agree the internet has negatives as well
as positives and further agree, there's a place
that government be involved in stopping the
harms and reducing the damage.
Um, we mention a few submit, uh,
suggestions in our submission,
and I'd like to call out here that one that would benefit
everyone young and old, which would be a rewrite
of the Privacy Act alongside along European lines
to better protect our privacy
and to limit the ability of both the big companies
and government to surveil us.
Thank you for your time. Do you have any questions?
Thanks very much. Committee. Are there any questions?
Phil Twi? Uh, just,
uh, unmute yourself, Phil.
Can't hear you.
Um, Thomas, do you think that, um, social media companies
and internet service providers should be exempt from the
normal liability that, uh,
our legal system places on people who publish content?
Well, if they're publishing content,
they shouldn't be immune from the, uh, li liability,
but of course, in many cases they're not publishing content.
It'd be like pub punishing, uh, NZ post
for delivering a letter, which has got
offensive material on it.
Mm. But they, but a social media company or a,
or a um, uh, platform
is akin to a newspaper, isn't it?
They, they publish other,
they publish content from all sorts
of sources. They convey it to
People. It varies on what, what's
actually happening.
I mean, if one person's talking
to another person on a social media company,
I would say they're not publishing it.
'cause they're not exercising to editorial control.
Now I'm not saying it should be a a free for all as well.
There's obviously standards to, to follow.
And so, and I think we should be pushing those standards.
Um, but it's not as easy to say, Hey,
this just matches straight up to that.
Thank you so much. That's, um, all,
we've got time for this afternoon.
Appreciate you taking time. Um, present thank committee.
Now going to the Laws Association of New Zealand Technology
and Law Committee via Zoom.
I think we've got Isaac and Lloyd joining us.
Hira, I'm here. Is Lloyd
here? No sign of it yet.
Lloyd online. Um, yeah, just prompt. No. Okay.
He's, yep.
Okay. In that case, I'll, I'll just get started then. Uh,
And we've got 10 minutes with you,
including time for questions.
Yeah, sure. Thank you very much.
So, KDA, my name is Isaac.
I'm here on behalf of the Law Association's
Technology and Law Committee.
I'm also joined by Lloyd, who is the committee's chair.
Uh, I'm currently a content moderator at Synesthesia,
which is a synthetic media generation,
uh, platform based in Europe.
And in the past I've held roles at NetSafe
and, uh, the Department of Internal
Affairs Digital Safety Team.
Uh, so our committee comprises legal practitioners
and law adjacent professionals with specialist expertise
and law, technology
and public policy
who have an interest in supporting the development
of legislative and regulatory frameworks,
which protect the rights
and interests of New Zealanders from the risk
and harms that digital technologies can bring.
So first of all, on behalf of the committee, thank you
for the chance to present on this inquiry
and, uh, to this inquiry.
Our committee wishes to highlight primarily
that New Zealand's current digital safety
framework is fragmented, outdated,
and lacks the structural of a site to respond effectively
to new and escalating risks,
which we think is a big problem, particularly considering
how, uh, technological change is happening in this current
era era with artificial intelligence
and cross-border digital tech, digital services.
Uh, and as a result, uh, we'd like to flag, particularly
that young people are not adequately protected
by the law in New Zealand.
From two particular threats we've outlined
and now written submissions, firstly the big one being deep
fake abuse, particularly in terms of deep, uh,
image-based sex abuse.
And secondly, harmful platform architecture, which refers
to instances where websites, apps,
and other digital platforms cause harm.
True design elements rather than content posted per se, uh,
includes elements like content, algorithms, lack
of content moderation, or content policies which encourage
dangerous and harmful practices.
And we believe these issues could be better addressed
to support vulnerable groups like young people through
law reform, which we have set out in our written submission.
But on top of it too, we also like to highlight that
for these reforms to be effective in the long term,
New Zealand must fundamentally shift its approach
to digital safety laws.
As many previous, uh, submitters have highlighted, a lot of
what we have right now see feels reactive
in our legislation.
And we disapprove of how the currently proposed law reforms
seem to be continuing down this track as well, which, uh,
leaves risk paused by threats
that are currently foreseeable wide open.
And we've seen other jurisdictions start adopting more
future-proof solutions focusing on developing safety
principles, uh, platform architecture requirements
and transparency, reporting obligations, all contributing
to a more holistic online safety strategy.
And we would like to see New Zealand develop that as well.
And that's it for me, summing up, uh,
what we've already submitted in our written submissions.
But I'd just like to touch on a bit
of some reflections I've had from listening
to the other submissions this morning as well.
Yeah. Think it was one big message we'd like to send to the,
to the inquiry today.
Uh, I I, I'd like to encourage the committee
to question whether or not social media really is this
immovable concept that it's possible
to define in this moment now
and has always been the same for the past 10 years,
or whether it's something that we could change in the short
term true changing some true some new re regulation
or legislation, because I've made a very deliberate decision
today to join the, the meeting from my gaming setup at home
rather than my work from home setups.
You might be able to tell. And I think I wanted, a big part
of that is 'cause I wanted to show personally that I, I'm,
I'm in my mid twenties now.
I've grown up through, I grew up very much on social media
and being heavily involved in gaming communities.
I think it was a really positive influence on me.
It gave me the chance to develop many beneficial skills like
communication, empathy, problem solving.
And as a team, I was actually involved in moderating content
on communities frequented by on, by young people,
which I think actually helped me develop a lot
of very core essential skills as well that, uh, carry me
through law school and even
to a professional content moderation job today
where I help keep other people safe online.
And even, even though I have such a strong feeling that,
you know, technology can on,
on spaces can be a good influence on young people, I do have
to acknowledge that I think those social media I use on my
phone on a daily basis now is a very different beast from
what I grew up with and what I benefited from.
And, but I, I, I do constantly, I can, I do feel that
what we have now could be made better for young people
as well through some changes.
Because if we identify correctly the, the elements of it
that cause the most harm and, you know, develop legislation
or regulation regulations that can target those harms
and encourage safe, uh, companies
to create safer platforms for that young people can use
as well and benefit from.
So yeah, that sums up, uh, what I have to say
and I'm open for questions. Thank
You, Ji. Thank you. I
Just wanted to add a little bit to Isaac there before we
Go. Oh, sorry, Lloyd. That's
Okay. Yeah, that's all right. Yeah,
sorry.
I, the prompts had me re-log in, so it took a minute.
Um, I'm at the moment I'm heavily engaged in Australia
with Curtin University and researching, um, issues of ai,
deep fakes, um, and cloning technologies
and the harms that it, that it's gonna create on
the entirety of society.
Now adding to, we, we've applied that to some
of the submission we've applied to you today,
but I think it's important from the committee's perspective
is to find the balance between not becoming the parent
as a government, um,
and allowing the parents to do their job,
and then also creating that balance
where companies become responsible for what they are doing
and, and harm online.
Now we've seen a, a bit of a debacle
with the Online Safety Act in the uk,
which has gone a little bit too far
and is ending up creating more problems than the
mischief it's trying to solve.
So striking that balance, I think is really important.
Um, there are a number of issues that Ai,
d fakes create for young people.
And education, I think is the primary form
because even if we regulate in this area,
if we don't get the terms right, we are not going
to have a sufficient, um, effect of solving
or stopping that harm.
We've seen that with section 22
of the Harmful Digital Communications Act.
Um, we've seen a deficiency in 2 1 16 G of the Crimes Act
where the definitions don't quite fit
and some aspects aren't captured.
Um, I noticed a, from retired Judge Harvey, uh, a commentary
that he had on the new bill that's being put forward
before Parliament on creating a, a new definition
for the HDCA and section 2 1 6 G.
Um, and it doesn't quite fit the bill,
and it actually can create more difficulties
in, in bringing it home.
So I think a, a balance has to be struck between, um,
stopping the mischief, creating accountability,
but also not stopping young people from learning how
to protect themselves online,
because the online systems are always going
to evolve and create harm.
Um, so we need to have that balance struck in them.
So that, that's what I'd like to sort of add
through verbally, uh, into the submissions
that we put forward this morning.
Thank you. Oh, thank you.
So, talking about a I deep fix,
you have emphasized a lot on that.
If we have a stronger stance on AI defects,
uh, what is your view?
Like, what is the kind of proportion of serious harm
that you think we would be able to tackle
by just having a stronger stance on ai deep fakes?
Well, I think in, in, in creating the balance, not just
with deep fakes, but also with the, with the approach of
criminalizing or, uh, bringing sanction around areas where
any form of manipulation of imagery, um,
which encapsulates DeepFakes encapsulates cloning
and encapsulates, uh, the potential for, uh, uh,
manipulation will protect against potential, um,
young people, pornography, um, misappropriation of, uh,
deepfake style pornography.
It'll capture the new AI technology coming forward,
but it'll also capture those
who are just using standard tools
that are already available.
So cleaning up, um,
the definitions within our legislation will help
to encapture those areas without going too far
where we actually stifle the creativity as well.
That balance is a very hard one to strike.
Uh, and part of the research that I'm doing with Curtin is
to actually see how we can develop those definitions
that it is actually fit for purpose
and isn't going to create, uh, additional harms.
I, I think the UK's approach
and respect of trying to, um, create identity, uh,
in order to access some of this information, um,
creates a bigger problem
because now we've got all this digital information
that's out there for AI to scrape and create further scams
and all the rest of it from.
So I think that creates a bigger problem.
Uh, and it doesn't really solve the issue
because VPNs, et cetera, then create an environment
where they can still access this information anyway,
and just banning VPNs isn't gonna solve the problem.
Um, so I, I think it's really important
that we refine the definition to be encapsulating
and capturing rather than, um, trying
to solve at an ad hoc approach of just
cherry picking the definition to solve a harm,
and then having to add to it and add to it,
because I, I think that's gonna create more problems.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Um, very quick final question. Catherine,
Uh, thank you Chair.
Um, you have touched on other jurisdictions,
just the UK then, um, earlier on Isaac spoke about, uh,
jurisdictions moving to a holistic approach.
Uh, can you give some examples of where you are seeing that
holistic approach?
Uh, just to elaborate a little bit further on that.
Yeah, I'm happy to answer that, Lloyd, if you Yeah, okay.
Uh, the, the main, the main reason I speak to
that I think is that I'm noticing that, uh, new Zealand's,
the, the, the proposed laws
of about the implement social media age restrictions looks
very similar to what we saw pushed out in Australia
and seems to be driven as well
by the efforts made in the uk.
And I think something that, something note something I,
I think it's quite important that the UK
and Australia both have is that, uh,
alongside the age restriction, age restriction laws,
they have set out guidelines for how platforms, uh,
can assess whether a platform is,
is whether their features are child appropriate,
whether they're child, whether they're safe for children,
and what risk they pose to children,
and how they can mitigate, uh, the risks of their services.
Whereas so far in the,
in the proposed New Zealand law doesn't seem like we,
we haven't set out anything like that.
And I think that's really important
because it gives platforms clear indicators on
how they can develop safer technologies.
And I think that's good because it, it kind
of mitigates the issue with stuff
with interactions going underground.
Because if platforms are given clear guidelines on
how they can create child safe platforms, social media,
that might be watered down with less algorithms or less
or stricter content moderation, that we don't have to worry
so much about the, the,
the activity going underground completely, ultimately,
you know, we, yeah, I, I think that's, that's, that's,
that'll make a big difference and be much more helpful.
Thanks very much. We're seeing a little bit of
that approach in the US as well.
So, um, there are jurisdictions
that are already playing with that,
Dave, very much for taking the time
to present to us this afternoon.
Very much appreciated. Um, we've now got Aaron Hunt, uh,
live with us in the select committee room just
for everyone online.
Um, who's watching this, uh,
select committee inquiry this afternoon.
We are running about 20 minutes behind, so
after this will be, um, a short break
and then we will be, uh, recomme commencing at FFA two.
Thank you. I'm Aaron Hunt, the partner McVay ing.
Um, I specialize in active for clients
who are experiencing online harm, uh,
especially under the HDCX.
I do have experience with this in the courts as
to how these things are handled.
And my thoughts are to those parents who actually submitted
to the, to the inquiry who
have gone through this with their children.
Um, I know what they've been through, I've seen
what they've been through with my clients.
Uh, I understand why they would write to this,
um, that their submissions.
I don't wanna go through my submissions again
'cause we've already read them hopefully.
Uh, and there's limited time available.
I wanna make a couple of quick points though.
Uh, we've seen a lot of comparisons between social media
and tobacco and alcohol and meth at one point,
and I think there's an unfair comparison.
Um, there is no benefit to society for tobacco
and alcohol with children quite highly, probably with adults
as well, really, but social media there is,
we've seen benefits mentioned many times today.
I think a better comparison would basically perhaps be
around, um, rugby for kids.
Children play rugby, there is definitely a risk there
and they can get harmed.
So we change the rules of rugby without being
playing it in the first place.
There's a benefit to the entire event,
don't ban it, just make it better.
And I, same with social media. We want to make it better.
We want it safer, not just a band in co compare comparison
to very, very bad things.
Um, it's also, we two heard about
that this would provide a talk to parents if you had a ban
and the parents could use that ban
and say, sorry, no, Tim, you can't use your phone.
It's actually removing the parent's right to be a parent.
It's not a tool that's removing one of their rights,
their fundamental cho choices as to what their children can
and cannot have a access to.
At the same time, we're also removing that child's right
to their choice of how they speak,
where they speak, what they say.
We're saying to them, sorry,
but no, you cannot have that right anymore until an age,
until an age that freedom of expression is gone.
Um, my suggested approach would be to have, uh,
and definitely better, to enforce better
requirements on the platforms.
The platforms are there to make money.
They have no moral their money.
They, they're all about the shareholder profit.
Better requirement platforms be more open about the
algorithms or even perhaps for children
to have an algorithm, um, algorithm free account.
If you are on YouTube, you're on TikTok,
you are only actually seeing what, who you follow,
what your friends are up to,
not seeing going on the rabbit holes,
other, other, um, things.
They push you in that direction, um,
and perhaps have that based on you opt into that
or if the platform using its technology can send
to property a child, you are
automatically put into that category.
You don't have an algorithm on your account.
You are purely saying what your earn your friend list
or your family list, your follow list.
That would then give those parents more
opportunity to go, okay, who's on that list?
Who are you actually contacting with? Who are you following?
Who are you watching? Rather than basically leaving it
to the algorithm to try and make money off them
going down the rabbit hole.
Um, we've also seen of course the use of technology of AI
and these two try to make,
to make more money from, from children.
We should use that technology to detect harm,
to detect harmful messages, to detect more of
what is going on that is bad, rather than forcing money
into, into the, um, to the pockets of the shareholders.
The technology is there to do
better, they're not doing better.
Uh, definitely a review of the HT C Act.
That was, um, that was always been a,
a bad legislation from the very beginning, um, attractive
for children and parents as to how to be online safer.
Um, and altogether sort of creates a complicated solution
to a complicated issue.
A banner itself isn't going to solve the issue,
gonna push it underground, a assume have said,
use the VPNs and that sort of thing.
We want to try to find a solution
that's actually fixing the issue, not just ignoring it.
Thanks very much. I'm gonna ask the first question about
the point you make about alcohol, uh, driving, um,
and the third one.
But in terms of the difference between, say for example,
alcohol and driving a, um,
the state already takes away my right as apparent
to determine the age at which my child should be able
to drive on roads, which are an infrastructure
that the government provides.
Surely it's not an absolute to say that the state
shouldn't, um, make a choice about whether
or not it's appropriate for me as a parent
to allow my children
to access the infrastructure called the internet.
Um, at a particular age.
I use tobacco and alcohol as example.
Driving is, sorry, driving is
a, a good example though. I gotta say.
Sorry. Yeah. Okay.
Um, driving, I suppose there is, there is a fringe of mine.
I suppose there is, um, there is an age I think at which you
don't have the attention to, to drive a car, in fact,
that you are driving a ton of metal at
for 50, 60 80 k an hour.
Uh, and it's a, a dangerous weapon effectively.
I think that difference is, um, the ability to, for someone
to watch YouTube videos or to talk
with their friends on TikTok is different to driving a bit
of, uh, a autonom down the road at high speeds.
I think there is that, that danger to the rest of society
as a why you're not driving a car rather than actually just
to, to that there is a course of utility
and children driving cars possibly, you know, get past
and parenting something else.
But I think that's more of the, the societal risk for
of the child driving the car.
So when I was in a classroom last Monday, um, I went
to several different schools actually all on the same day.
And in each school I asked kids
to put up their hands whether
or not they were on, um, online social media platforms, uh,
to distinguish between whether they were on the adult ones
and on the on the children ones like example kids
messenger versus messenger.
And it was even in the classroom very clear when one
of the individuals, um, said we should ban it,
the peer pressure that came on to change her view there.
And then, so I take your point about a cart being a weapon
and a big ton of metal, but isn't, um,
online bullying just a different type of weapon
that maybe have a different speed and velocity
but could still have a similar impact, um,
on children's lives
By the same, so you said the same question you have was
just any tool there is, um, anything that can be turned
to something bad, um, I could write something bad in a poem
and about, about you, about
and poem that could then be read out in front of the class,
which would cause harm.
But we never gonna ban poetry
because it could be used for harm.
So social media definitely can be used for online harm.
Also, things that are creative, things that are productive,
things that are encouraging, supportive.
We've heard from LGP uh, t groups, from from, uh,
disabilities minorities, um, who see this as a way to,
they can communicate and grow
and actually build this support.
The fact that you can use it for harm isn't means it's a, a,
a possible tool, but not it's only function.
I think that's where we have the issue with the comparison
with tobacco and alcohol
because those have no real positive function
social media can.
Catherine, we Thank you Aaron
for your insights, um, and your submission.
Um, I'm quite interested in your thoughts on age
verification, um, because you make varying points on it.
Uh, in terms of other countries, uh, going
through a process, uh, I'm just wondering, do you support,
age verification, or you don't?
And can you just elaborate a little bit further,
because then you do mention
that perhaps it could be a solution, uh, to be handled
by a government agency.
I put forth as an idea that if, if we did go ahead with a,
uh, a requirement for, for an age verification,
then a government agency might be a better process.
Then it's giving out to the public
market, to the private market.
Uh, at which point we have issues with, with privacy, with,
um, giving out more information that's already out there
to some out there, I'm not, uh,
supportive of, of a full ban.
But there are some times where perhaps, um, such as,
you know, with the algorithms, if we got rid
of the algorithms for children, there could be a way
to perhaps, uh, show someone as a child to then get that
that benefit to the child, um, on their accounts.
Afic itself is problematic because as people said
before, um, to do that will require adults
to prove their adults rather than kids to prove their kids.
So every time you use a website
that's gonna fall under the umbrella,
which is a very broad umbrella as to
what social media could be, you as an adult,
you are providing your identification to that website
to prove that you are, you are not a child.
And that means, means me,
you even else providing our passport, our license,
some other way to, to push forward that we are, um,
the, the age we say we are.
Now, I recommended real meet as a possible solution.
'cause then we have one government website
who can just confirm with these sites.
Yes, we know who Aaron is.
He is 47 years old, rather him to meet, to provide it
to every single site that I use.
Uh, we're seeing that in some of the off offshore locations.
Things like Wikipedia are even being caught up in the
possibility of having to show your age, um, gaming services,
uh, YouTube read at Discord or having to show your age now
and as an adult, that would become just difficult to,
to constantly do trying use new service.
If we had a one central location, then the government's
for better trust than I I I trust the government more than
trust the private facility to, to hold my information.
That would give me a chance to log in
and say, yes, we, me can link this through Digital key goes
through that shows that I I'm the age that I am.
Thank you. You mentioned, uh, state controlling, um,
the age verification.
So just want to explore a bit more.
Uh, uh, if somebody goes overseas
and there is no age restriction there,
they set up their account on whatever platform they do
and they come back to New Zealand.
So then the state becomes responsible for them being online.
I mean, who becomes responsible in that position
and they keep their account.
When I, when I gave that, um, example, it was
there in case that sort of a band went forward.
Um, I obviously say that a band's difficult
because of that exact scenario.
If you open an account from offshore,
you are sort of outside that.
You come to New Zealand as a tourist
and you wanna take photographs of it on Instagram,
post on Instagram, how do you do that?
If you're now with New Zealand, you're caught
by this register, these, these rules,
it's not a perfect solution.
And I think there should be a ban in the first place.
But if there was gonna be a ban, I'm trying to find a way
to, to make it less impactful for New Zealand society as a,
as a whole, rather than just think that we can just provide,
uh, student IDs to who your child.
Um, I think this would be a, a safer way of doing it,
but I think it's still a bad thing to do in the first place.
Thanks so much Aaron.
Really appreciate the time, uh,
you've given us this afternoon.
Thank you. Um, members, we're going
to break now till two 30.
Um, and we commence then. Thank you.
So we've got Amnesty International, um, on Zoom.
Oh no, here person. Sorry.
Surprise, how you going? That one, that one was my fault.
Um, I'm trying to manage, um,
understanding, which is what's great.
We're welcome. Thank you for taking the time
to join us in person and we've got 10 minutes
with you this afternoon, including time for questions.
Thank you, Koto. I'm Lisa,
The advocacy director of Amnesty International,
and I'm joined here with my colleague Anna,
who's our advocacy and policy manager.
So thank you very much for the opportunity
to speak with you this afternoon.
I'm briefly gonna talk about the, the harm
that we are concerned about and talk a little bit about the
type of change that we'd like to see to address that harm
and hopefully leave, um, some type of questions
as well if there's anything you'd like to ask.
Good. So I think one
of the important things we really also wanted to get
through in our submission is there's
so much potential with online spaces.
You know, these are, these are spaces
that can truly empower individuals, empower communities.
And so what we're trying to do here is think about
how can we best leverage and, uh, and use this potential
because our concern is that with the lack
of guardrails, what we've seen
with them unfettered is the risk of, uh, real harm,
which I know you would've heard about today,
but also the silencing effect that can come from that,
which can have a hugely broader chilling effect
on civil society.
And I know something you would've also heard is
that a core part of that problem is about the design
of online platforms
and how the designed many have been designed
to promote high engagement content regardless of harm
that's driven by a business model.
So very quickly on the harm, obviously
what we've seen is profound and widespread.
And what we'd really encourage the committee to consider
is not just the harm impacting young people,
which we know is, is really serious,
but the harm more broadly across society.
There are harms at the individual level, which
as I said are really profound,
but there are also harms at the societal level,
which are also incredibly harmful and profound.
The issues of online radicalization, for example,
and violent extremism as well known.
And in the recent 2025 New Zealand
security threat environment assessment
by the New Zealand SIS, they noted
that there was no one pathway to violence is the same,
but most radicalization is happening online.
And went on to say, we continue to see our young
and more vulnerable people as being particularly at risk
of becoming radicalized to violent extremist ideology.
And so one of the things I reflect with this is
that even if you are not on social media, the harm
that can come from the online world can impact you.
So this is why we really encourage that broader view.
Uh, I really want to talk very quickly just about
that societal level of harm
because that goes really to the need for these, uh,
solutions that are focused on design issues.
But I'm just gonna briefly talk about three examples.
So one of the example we included in the submission was
around the research amnesty did in the Raja, uh,
ethnic clean in 2017.
So the beginning of August, 2017,
the Myanmar security forces undertook a brutal campaign
of ethnic cleansing against the Rohingya Muslims.
And amnesty carried out in-depth investigation into meta
formerly Facebook
and their role in the serious human rights
violations perpetrated.
Essentially what was happening, uh, as the research
found was that meta's algorithms were proactively amplifying
and promoting content which incited violence,
hatred, and discrimination.
And the research shows, I won't go into the details,
I know it's in our submission, but how in the maps
and years leading up to the horrific violence, uh,
how Facebook can become an echo chamber of hatred.
I note importantly
that the UN's independent international fact finding mission
on ultimate, ultimately, ultimately concluded that the role
of social media was significant in the
atrocities that occurred.
Another example is research
and online abuse against the L-G-B-T-I community in Poland
on the social media platform X, this is between 20 and 2024
and 2025, the research found that the platform's failures,
and particularly around content moderation,
has formatted forted anti L-G-B-T-I sentiments
and allowed for the targeting
of the community become increasingly normalized.
People told amnesty
that they regularly see posts on the platform dehumanizing
them or even calling for their extermination.
A third example, uh, that I've just quickly go over
before handing over to Anna is recent amnesty research
that showed, again,
this focus on the social media platform X,
how it played a central role in the spread
of harmful content, which contributed
to racist violence against Muslim
and migrant communities in the uk.
So in the immediate aftermath
of the tragic triple murder in Southport in July, 2024,
ex platform X essentially became a hotspot of racist,
islamophobic and xenophobic rhetoric.
And as these hateful narratives spread, offline violence
erupted, the UK office of communications concluded
that social media posts appeared to have considered
to the significant violent disorder that ensued.
So one of the things that I was just wanting to point out
with these examples was that there is a spectrum
of harm that is happening.
Uh, it's profound at the individual level,
but it's profound also at the societal level.
And therefore, when we are thinking of
how we can effectively intervene here
and what are the types of guardrails that we need to put up
to be effective, we need
to be considering this whole spectrum.
So I gonna hand over to Anna to talk about the change.
Thanks Lisa Koto.
I am gonna be elaborating on what Lisa has said there.
So we do not support a social media ban for young people.
Instead, we'll be speaking to
and addressing the structural changes that are needed.
We know that young people are experiencing harm online,
which is really important to address,
but as Lisa was speaking to, we also know
that young people are not the only ones being harmed.
We are focused on holding businesses to account
and addressing the structures that enable
and perpetuate online harm.
I highlight our recommendations in the report.
We want to see legislation
that provides a comprehensive framework
for driving online safety.
Importantly, the government up must uphold its obligations
under TGI
and work with Maori to co-design appropriate legislation
and policy approaches must uphold Maori data sovereignty
in our submission, which I will reiterate here, we speak
to components of legislation that are needed.
This includes having an independent oversight
with a dedicated agency that has the ability
to impose penalties for non-compliance.
This is really important to make sure this is actually being
upheld and actually enforceable.
We note that internet New Zealand has, um,
in their submission elaborated on
what a body could look like.
Transparency is really important.
And so as Lisa was talking
before about algorithms, this is about understanding
how algorithms are working, what's being recommended
also about complaint systems, how are decisions being made?
And in terms of what I was saying
before, of imposing on, uh, the ability to impose penalties
for non-compliance, having audits to know what's going on,
what's happening to make sure that
the risks are being identified
and there's mitigation occurring.
And finally, duty of care.
So this places a proactive duty on tech companies to ensure
that their products and services are safe,
including requiring robust due diligence processes
to identify risks and mitigation strategies.
I would also like to highlight that
we are not the first country to be thinking about this.
And we can see, uh, several countries, including Australia,
the UK, and the EU, are doing work in this space
that we can be learning from.
And we have a real opportunity to jump on board
and see meaningful change
and think, what does this, what could this look like
and what should this look like here on alawa? Thank you.
Thanks so much. Um, Ruben Davidson.
Yeah, look, thank you. And, um, you've actually answered,
I had a question after Lisa, but Anna, you've answered it.
So thanks for an excellent submission
and for for the great work that you do.
Katherine, Thank you
for your very thorough submission.
Look, I was interesting to hear you talk about the Amnesty
International surveys
and them showing that social media amplifies abuse,
uh, racism, uh, bullying, pornography, sex exploitation,
uh, yet social media is one of the main areas
where this is happening.
But then you don't think that we should be doing anything
to protect these vulnerable communities on social media.
So how do you think
our most vulnerable communities should be protected
from social media harm?
How do you feel that we can do more to achieve that
if you don't support any restrictions?
We strongly support regulation on social media.
So we, we want to see comprehensive laws in place to deal
with the harms that we are seeing.
And the three components of that
that we think are very important is an independent
regulator, uh, duty, uh, requirements around duty of care
to be identifying what are the risks
and the mitigation strategies
and requirements around transparency.
So similar to online safety laws
that we've seen in other jurisdictions, such as, uh,
the uk the EU and Australia
Are supporting a, uh, a,
a ban on social media or under 16.
That's right. So we don't support a ban on social media.
We support, uh, we want to see a broader law
that applies more broadly across all parts of society
that puts the requirements on the tech companies.
Okay. Thanks So much.
Um, that's all we've got time for.
We're going, uh, thank you for joining us on this afternoon.
Um, and we're now gonna go
to the Suicide Prevention Research Center.
Um,
yeah, yep.
Dr. Anne Clark.
Um,
yeah, it's
great.
We've got 10 minutes with you this afternoon, including time
for questions over to you.
I'm a professor in the School of nursing Faculty
of Medical Health Sciences at the University of Auckland,
and I'm also the Cure Kids Pro Professorial Chair.
In lest mental health, I'm also
a mother negotiating the digital space with my children.
Today I'm representing to
the Suicide Prevention Center from the
University of Auckland.
I'm a researcher who works in child and adolescent health
and have a number of research projects addressing the
prevention of mental health distress amongst young people,
including how to respond to self-harm and suicide online.
I also led the, uh, youth 2000 National Youth Health
and Wellbeing Survey
that identified the increase in mental health distress
among youth in I want to acknowledge the speakers before me
and their concerns about protecting our tamari,
our children in this rising distress.
I would like to have my submission, our submission, um,
taken as read, but like
to highlight two major points based on the submission.
The first, the evidence that attributes social media
as the cause of increased distress is simplistic.
As, um, professor Axel Burns highlighted this morning,
there are lots of disturbing things happening in our society
that our young people are worried about.
It's never just one thing that causes mental health harm.
See, the other part is that much
of the evidence is cross-sectional, meaning
that it's associations only.
We don't know if social media is causing distress
or young people who are distressed are online more.
We also dunno about how other factors like loneliness,
racism, discrimination,
and poverty affect mental health in these analyses.
A re recent systematic review found that when you account
for all other factors, social media contributes
to a very small amount of the distress over
and above other factors in young people's lives.
However, we do know
that even small population changes can have real pa real
impact and cause harm.
A band sounds really appealing, right?
But I personally think it's like putting a plaster on a
festering saw and hoping it will go away.
The digital world is unregulated,
it is shamelessly marketing to our children,
creating addictive algorithms
and then adducts any responsibility leaving the burden on
children and young people in their whanau.
We would never do this in any other environment without
looking at solutions to make the environment safer.
This brings me to my second point.
We must take a design for good approach,
create a safer environment
and regulatory frameworks that keep us all safe.
It is our responsibility to provide digital environments
that are good for everyone, not just our children.
And we must hold those digital platforms accountable,
update things like the harmful communications legislation
and other, um, other, um, legislations to ensure
that they are agile
and can respond to the really rapidly changing nature
of the digital environment.
Young people are the experts here
and must be involved in any of these solutions
because they are the ones who are gonna find ways
around many of these solutions.
Regarding the under 16 ban, there's already an age band
for under 13 year olds that is ineffective.
Um, a recent study found that 80 to 90%
of under 13 year olds in Australia are already using social
media with recent trials on age verification
failing abysmally.
Another point that I would like to highlight is that
how will this affect our 16 plus age group
who are most at harm for suicidality
and how will they negotiate this space?
A ban will ultimately not address the underlying issues
and may cause more harm if we don't address the foundation
overwhelmingly today.
Um, of the submissions that I've heard people want change,
most people recognize
that one solution IEA ban isn't gonna fix
this complex issue.
And our research, we're working really hard
to make sure we have good quality evidence
to support young people's wellbeing
and have outlined six key points on,
on our submission to address this.
Finally, something that I think's really important is
that bus business has a role here.
This is a global issue.
We are not alone in grappling with these issues.
Imagine if we could be world leaders in creating a u unique
digital landscape that is enjoyable, safe
encourages innovation, cooperate cooper cooperation,
and supports us all
to be good global digital CI citizens in roa.
That would be a country where I would want to live
and have my children and my mouna grow up kilda.
Any questions?
Got it. Thank you so much Ji.
Yep, thank you. Um, so I note your nine points
that you have listed under a ban
could have negative impacts.
Um, but I'm curious to know, during your work,
did you come across, um, any views, uh,
that if there is a ban for under 16
and if it is too punitive for, uh, these various platforms
that they may decide not
to have presence here in New Zealand?
Not in my research, no.
I think, you know, I think there, there's a range
of issues here, um, in that
if young people get banned on social media sites,
they will migrate to other places
and those places are less likely to be regulated and
therefore young people are more likely to be vulnerable.
So I think, you know, the threat that if they're gonna, um,
remove the services, I think is a bit of a hollow,
um, threat to be honest.
Yeah. Uh, Ruben,
Thank you. Um,
and thank you for that presentation.
Um, you've spoken about the the ban
not being the right approach.
I guess my question is, um,
and you've given really good detail as to why,
so my question is who do,
who do you think is getting it right?
And that can either be from a platform perspective,
a country, other countries that are getting it really right,
or even processes that are underway in other places
that you think is the correct process to go about it.
Yeah, look, I, I've been talking to a range
of different people internationally
and this is a global issue
and everyone's taking a slightly different approach
and I think my researcher brain kind of goes,
what an opportunity to look at h all the different solutions
each of these countries is using, monitor how this is going
for ch children and young people's mental health and then,
and then use that evidence to create the best landscape
that we possibly can with the evidence that we have.
I also think that New Zealand is doing some really
innovative stuff, like we are kind of looking at how, um,
we can create digital platforms where, um,
young people are in charge of, um, uh, uh,
deciding what's appropriate and what's not, rather than,
um, external stuff.
So I think that there are some really interesting things
starting to happen and um, yeah, I think
that there's still work to be done here
and nobody's got got it right yet,
but much like if we think about, um, you know,
motor vehicle crashes, um,
we've had a huge reduction in death rate,
but it wasn't just one thing that actually, um, uh,
supported those death, uh, mortality reductions.
It was many, many solutions over a period of time.
So one solution is never gonna be enough.
It's gonna re require a whole, um, community
of, um, solutions to be able
to address this really meaty issue.
Thank you very much. Um, Terry Ann,
I appreciate the time you've had with us this afternoon, um,
and appreciate the time you've taken
to present to the committee.
Got, we're now moving
to the Pediatric Society of New Zealand.
Um, if they're online, they're not. Okay.
Yep, that's right.
I just thought I'd check again, so we'll, we'll go, um,
if they're online now to, um, lake Pediatric Department.
Great. So Dr.
Amy, if, uh, you're able to turn on your mic, um,
and your video be appreciated,
Kiata, Kiara, Amy, we've got, uh, five minutes
with you this afternoon, including
anytime you give us for questions.
Awesome. So, um, Ko, thank you so much
for the opportunity to speak.
So my name is Dr. Amy Catula.
I'm a pediatrician at Roto Hospital
and I'm the clinical lead for the sexual assault service
caring for Tamari across Rota Topo.
And today I speak both from my own perspective as well
as on behalf of the Lakes pediatric Department.
Every week we are seeing harms of social media on the health
and wellbeing of our tamari.
And these harms are not abstract, they're devastating
and they're preventable.
And so we support raising the age of access to 16.
A tragedy that should have never happened
is a young 13-year-old girl who I cared for,
she was contacted on Snapchat by Ravine Saley,
who was pretending to be 16.
In reality, he was in his twenties
and he has sexually assaulted three young
girls in a similar manner.
One, even while he was on bail,
that beautiful young girl was raped.
And she's not alone. These are more, sorry,
Can we just hold Amy?
Yes.
Um, I've just been asked Amy, we're talking about a case
that's in public, correct?
Yes, it is in public.
It has been in the newspapers
and he has, um, been convicted.
That's, that's fine. Yeah.
Sorry, we're just checking that.
We'll give you that time back. Thank you.
That's okay. I understand.
From a confidentiality perspective, um, so she is not alone.
These are bright young people
who are at the top of their classes.
These kids simply are seeking friendship and connection,
but social media platforms give predators direct unfiltered
access to them with location sharing, often switched on.
By default, strangers can follow their movements to school
and even to their homes.
Nudes are requested and shared,
and once they're circulated at school,
the psychological damage is profound.
And these young people carry the shame and feel voiceless.
And so that's why I've boldly spoken out
on their behalf today.
My colleagues and the police have told me that
what reaches the hospital is only a tip of the iceberg.
Uh, they are seeing rising levels
of violent offending linked to online contact.
And likewise, schools are dealing with large numbers
of incidents that never make it to the police
or even to the health services.
In the health services.
We can't cope, we are already overwhelmed.
My colleagues in the psychiatric acute response teams, uh,
say that their services are designed for adults,
but they're now being dominated
by children under 18 wait lists along
and they're leaving families without help.
We are seeing rising anxiety, eating disorders, poor sleep,
attention issues, self-harm and prevention is far cheaper
and more effective.
Without it, we've remained the ambulance at the bottom
of the cliff and one which many young
people can't even reach.
Um, there's also,
this is also a big equity issue in the better educated,
wealthier families,
I see parents delaying social media access.
In contrast, I regularly come across nine
and 10 year olds from disadvantaged homes
who are already online.
They're unsupervised
because their parents are working multiple jobs
and simply don't have the capacity to offer alternatives.
These children are already at higher risk
for poorer outcomes, and they are the most exposed
education alone, cannot close that gap.
We need legislation with education
to provide equal protection for all tamari.
I also wanna address an elephant in the room.
Um, Dr. Owen Sinclair was supposed to present prior to me,
and he has submitted on behalf
of the Pediatric Society of New Zealand.
However, there was no formal transparent consultative
process to survey their members.
In contrast, I've spoken to over 30 pediatricians.
Majority are deeply concerned and support this change.
A few are neutral and asking how will it be undertaken.
However, none disagreed. Hence, Dr.
Sinclair's opinion contradicts the majority of pediatricians
that I've spoken with
and cannot be weighted on behalf of the whole ped society,
but should be held as his own personal opinion.
So on behalf of myself
and the roto pediatric department, I recommend
that we raise the minimum verified age
for social media access to 16,
and that we establish a dedicated online safety regulator.
We need to develop New Zealand overarching legislation
to protect, protect children online.
And that legislation needs to be paired with education
intelligence doesn't equal maturity,
and this is not a problem for our children to solve.
It is our duty to solve this and protect them.
So the future of our young people depends on this decision,
and I urge the committee to act boldly
and prioritize the wellbeing of our youth
and take preventative action.
Thank you so much, Amy, for your, uh,
submission this afternoon.
Thank, thank you. Um, that's all we have time for.
Appreciate you taking the time to present to the committee.
Thank you very much, Nui.
Um, so we're now going to a RC Center of Excellence
for Digital Child, um, for that digital child,
I should say via Zoom.
Professor Michael, I think is coming on. Here we go.
Um, we have 10 minutes with you this afternoon, um,
including any time you give us questions.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much.
Thank you for having me here today.
Um, I'm joining from Brisbane, um,
and acknowledge that, uh, this is the unseated territory
of the Tobo Andra Peoples.
Um, I am representing the Australian Research Council Center
of Excellence for the Digital Child,
which is a national research center headquartered here at
Queensland University of Technology,
and involving six Australian universities
and over 150 researchers.
I am a chief investigator in the center
and have been leading a project called
the Children's Internet.
My team is informed by a set
of understandings about young people
and digital technologies that go
beyond the headlines about digital technologies,
wellness, and screen time.
We recognize that just as all facets
of childhood are complex and inv
and involve opportunities and risks.
So to do digital childhoods, the risks for children
being online are real
and can include devastating consequences.
No one denies that,
but we also know
that young people gain a great deal from being online,
including to access the social networks friendship
and support learning and opportunities for leisure.
Young people have a right to be online
and will need digital skills to navigate their futures.
We are not in favor of banning young people from the,
from the online world.
We believe Australia's so-called social media ban
or delay is a blunt instrument
that destructs from the real reforms that we need.
The social media ban is, uh, difficult to implement.
The age verification technology simply doesn't work yet.
Um, the ban doesn't require the tech companies
to actually improve their services, the quality of content
or the experiences that they offer.
In fact, it may actually allow them
to be even less responsible
because of the, um, age gate of 16.
Some young people may be cut off from their support networks
and it will certainly push young people
to even less regulated parts of the internet.
So there are four things we believe we can do
to improve young children's online experiences.
We need standards
and investment in high quality digital
experiences for children.
We need tech companies
to engage in slow design processes when it comes
to technology likely to be accessed by children.
And we need associated consultation
with children and families.
We need child centered and inclusive regulation and policy,
and we need comprehensive media literacy initiatives
for children from the early years of education all the way
to senior schooling.
We've outlined these points comprehensively in our
publication principles for a better children's internet,
and I'm pleased to be here today
and happy to answer any questions you might have for me.
Thank you so much, Michael. Um, questions
for the professor?
Yep, thank you. Um, so, um, the thing is like,
there are obviously we are hearing concerns as well, uh,
because of, um, on a young people's online presence.
So how do you think we can find that balance
where we can provide that kind of safety, um,
and also instill that responsibility amongst young people?
So we are kind of lacking Exactly.
And how can we manage to get that kind of balance?
I think, I think the balance on the side
of the tech companies needs to come
through stronger regulation, um, and enforcement.
I think what often happens is that even
where regulation exists,
we don't necessarily see the strong follow up
through strong penalties
or through national governments, for instance,
being really willing
to hold the technology companies to account.
Um, so I think we can certainly do more on that side.
Then on the, um, responsibility side for both, um,
young people and and their carers.
We do need far more focus on media literacy.
Um, and we believe that we need, um,
comprehensive media literacy right
through from the early years of schooling all the way
through to the senior secondary media literacy.
Um, empowers people to be able
to think critically about their own participation online.
And, um, if you have that education,
then you are more likely to be in a position to, um,
ask critical questions and to take care of yourself online.
Thank you. Um, be Vanessa Wiener. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. Um, in your submission, um, there's a interesting,
um, mention of AI literacy or critical AI literacy.
Um, it sounds like that's a stepwise change between, um,
you know, what's happening now
and having, uh,
people having generally having that knowledge.
Um, one of the other submitters, um, I think it was, uh,
I can't remember who it was now, memory blank overload, um,
suggested that there was up to 12% of AI generated content
that was, um, basically sexual chats, um,
just given the, um, huge amount of energy that that takes
and, um, the, you know, the fact
that this was almost like the peak of, you know,
human endeavor and here we are, people are using it
for making up stupid videos of their friends.
Um, and, um, using it as a, as an online chatbot.
What are, I mean, where we're at now to
where you are suggesting seems like a huge gap,
and what do you think we'd need to do to close that gap?
I think it's a really good example, um,
with referring to ai.
So if you take a platform like character ai,
which is a chatbot platform that is being accessed
by many young people, it's, it's a platform
that's not included in Australia's social media ban, um,
for under sixteens for instance,
and yet is a platform that, um,
is potentially highly problematic.
It's a good example of a platform that needs to be, um,
strongly regulated and needs to, um, be required
to fall into line
with our social expectations about what's
appropriate for young people.
Um, so, um, it's also a great example of
where we need media literacy because, um, AI literacy
or critical AI literacy, if you like, would be a component
of media literacy more broadly.
And we see that these technologies, um, change
and evolve so rapidly that we need to keep up
and education system needs to keep up.
So we need
to focus on professional development for teachers.
We need to focus on how can we teach
about this in the classroom.
We need to focus on properly resourcing the development
of those kinds of educational responses as well.
Yeah, Catherine, wed
Thank you and thank you for that submission.
Look, I was just interested to ask you directly,
do you think the platforms themselves are doing enough
to protect children given the algorithms,
the inappropriate content?
And then you spoke about age verification, uh, just
before, uh, obviously it's very easy for a 9-year-old
to pose as a 16-year-old equally as easy for a 40-year-old
to, uh, pose as an 11-year-old.
Um, and that's extremely concerning.
Uh, what's your view, uh, around the,
the platforms themselves?
The platforms are simply not doing enough to regulate.
They're not, um, being responsive enough
to young people's needs.
There's no doubt about that.
The, the platforms need to do more, they need to improve,
they need to do better.
Um, but my concern is that, um, a ban is a blunt instrument
to respond to that.
In fact, um, if you simply say, well, we are now going
to ban, um, kids
until they're 16 from being on the platforms, it actually,
um, enables the platforms to do less
because it enables them to say, okay, well, um,
because young people will be 16
by the time they get onto our platforms, we don't need to be
as worried about, um, making sure
that we're regulating as effectively.
So I think in a, in, in a sense it's paradoxical
to be not requiring them to do better for younger kids.
We also know that, um, kids are on other platforms
that are not amongst the named social media platforms
that are part of the Australian ban.
So kids are on platforms like Roblox, for instance, um,
where there are all sorts of issues related to, um,
predatory behavior, um,
where there's unsafe practice and so on.
And that doesn't come under the purview of this ban.
Um, so my position is
that we simply need a much more effective overall approach
to the digital environment in terms of making sure
that it's regulated,
but also making sure that these companies, um, are required
to follow the regulations
and that, um, when it's required that they,
they do pay the penalties for not doing that.
Thank you so much, Michael. That's all.
We've got time for this afternoon.
Appreciate the time you've
taken to present to our committee.
Thank you. Next up we've got Dr. Lucas
Yu on Zoom.
Lucas, if you can turn on your video
and turn on your mark, it'll be appreciated.
There we go. And we've got five minutes
with you this afternoon, including any time
you give us for questions.
Thank you. Good
afternoon, chair, deputy chair and members of the committee.
I'm Lucas and I recently received a PhD in digital policy
and regulation at the University of Otago.
My research was influenced by my experience in South Korea,
which has a long history of tight regulation of illegal
and harmful content, including diverse
institutional experiments.
Since 1990s, I proposed, um,
an independent content review body to assess whether
reported post, uh, harmful to young people
and whether removal is appropriate.
It could build on existing organizations in New Zealand
and also take referrals from platforms struggling
with difficult cases.
In this way, it would provide independent guidance
to help platforms build consistent policies
for protecting young people from online homes.
It could also help the government work better.
Instead of each agency working in isolation,
the body could serve as a unified coordinated channel
for review and take down request
by centralizing these processes, again, not only efficiency,
but as a consistency and trust.
Of course, this approach will require for the discussion
and ensuring diverse representation from across society
with further strengthen its legitimacy and effectiveness.
Global shift is already underway as we know the uk, the us,
the EU and Australia have all introduced more
robust frameworks.
New Zealand now has opportunity to design its own light,
but effective system when
that protect young people while
safeguarding democratic values.
Mihi, thank you and I welcome your questions.
Thank you so much. Uh, any questions for Dr. Lucas?
No, um, thank you Dr. Lucas.
There's no questions from the committee, uh,
at this stage, so we'll. Oh, Francisco.
Thank you chair. Um, you mentioned in your submission
that you modeled it
after the, um, the South Korean regulatory experience,
But there's differences.
Can you walk through what those differences are?
Oh, south Korean, uh, approach is quite expensive approach.
When, uh, when people report, um, harmful contents
to state led institution, then the institution, uh,
make a decision about the post.
And according to, um, with that decision, they, um,
send the decision to platform
and platform has to respond whether they, uh,
follow the decision or not.
And the complaints could check
by visiting the site
or the specific page, whether it is
deleted or staying there.
Yeah, if it, if um, complaints has a, um,
if a PostIt is still there, then the compliance can, um,
appeal and then appeal process begins.
Yeah, that's the base basically is the process.
Thank you. Um, that's all we've got time
for, uh, this afternoon.
We appreciate you taking time to present to the committee.
We're now going to go to Dr. Alex Beatty.
Um, so Dr. Alex, if you can, there we go.
We've got, um, five minutes with you this afternoon,
including time for questions.
Uh, so over to you
Ika. Thank
you very much for the opportunity to speak today.
Core Dr. Alex Beatty ua.
I am a lecturer in media
and communication at Tinga Waka Victoria
University of Wellington.
My research focuses on digital wellbeing
and how people manage their screen time
and disconnect from the internet.
Now, to my knowledge, I've published the only research in
Alberto New Zealand, specifically ongoing offline
and am a recipient of a Mars.
And fast start on how people
with A DHD manage their screen time,
which gives me a unique perspective on today's topic.
I'm also a father of two young children.
In my submission, I caution against the blanket ban on
social media for under sixteens.
While concerns about online harms are valid,
I believe the ban risks oversimplifying a complex issue
and ignores the diversity of young people's experiences.
Instead, I advocate for a design focused educational
and innovation based approach.
Now I just wanna highlight three main
points from my submission.
One, addiction design is the problem, not young people.
Social media platforms use persuasive design features like
infinite scroll and algorithmic feeds
to maximize engagement.
These can and should be regulated just like we regulate
physical environments for safety.
Two young people are not a monolith.
Neurodiverse youth, for example,
may experience social media differently, sometimes
as a source of stress,
but often as a space for connection and identity.
A one size fits all band risks doing more harm than good.
Three, we should teach and innovate
and disconnection, not enforce it.
Schools could run unplugged campaigns
and integrate digital wellbeing into the curriculum.
Disconnection is a form of media literacy.
You need to learn how to disconnect.
It's hard, but you can learn.
I'm currently piloting tools like Brick
that I'm holding up on the screen here in my own teaching
to support healthier screen habits in my classes,
and I'll be happy to share those
findings with the committee.
There is also a role for business here
as there is an emerging digital wellbeing market
that I believe sincerely New Zealand become,
could become a leader in.
With our emphasis in this country on
lifestyle and wellbeing.
I think our entrepreneurs
and tech sector are well placed to develop digital solutions
that can support young people to live healthy
and safe digital lives.
Ultimately, social media is now part of our infrastructure
and we use it for education, community, entertainment,
creativity rather than banning it.
We need to make it safer
and more empowering for young people.
And I believe a bit of kiwi ingenuity can help us get there.
Thank you for listening and I
look forward to your questions now. Mahi.
Thanks Alex. Uh, Ji.
Yeah, thanks Alex for your submission.
We have, uh, heard from some submitters
and uh, also the view that we get is that, uh,
ban can actually send a strong signal to, uh, parents, uh,
that it's in important that kids get off social media, uh,
even if it's not a hundred percent effective.
So what would you say to those people?
I would say that yes,
it sends a strong signal to the tech sector.
I agree. My concern is what happens when the,
the children turn 17 and what skills
and literacies do they have
to navigate this complex digital world?
And as I've argued in my submission, learning when
to put down the phone, creating new habits,
setting boundaries is this new skill that we need
to develop in this digital age.
And I think we need to teach it at a younger age than say
17, which the band would would mean.
Thank you. Thank you Ruben.
Thank you. Um, yeah, really interesting presentation and,
and some of the stuff you've talked about with the, um,
that disconnection.
Are there, are there specific programs
that you've seen elsewhere that you would point to?
You've got brick and bloom both listed in the,
in the presentation, but are there others?
Brick and Bloom are both American inventions, I believe.
Uh, I know for, I know certainly there are unplugged
campaigns, there are thin grassroots campaigns run here in,
I couldn't name any specifically off the top of my head,
but I know different schools are doing different things
that we can certainly tap into from the,
like a community based approach.
Absolutely. And there's lots
of different advocacy groups around the world.
Digital, well, the Digital Wellness Institute is one.
I'm also a big fan of the five rights, um,
institute, uh, group in the uk.
I think that they're really leading the way in terms
of a child rights based approach to this topic.
Yeah. Excellent. Thank you.
Thanks so much, uh, Alex for joining us this afternoon.
Appreciate the time you've given us, um,
and for taking time to present to the committee.
Uh, can I now invite Rise Living, um, onto the screen?
Uh, Lee Mason, I think we've got you for, got you.
Five minutes afternoon.
Peter, can you hear me? Yes, we can indeed.
Five minutes including any time for questions over to you.
Awesome, thank you so much.
I'm the impact, uh, lead for Rise Living Safe
and I'm here today representing Rise Living Safe.
Safe to speak to our submission, we focus on a very specific
and urgent part of the online harm environment
and that's preventing violence.
Our work is centered on understanding
and disrupting the pathway to violence
that is emerging in digital spaces.
The core problem is this,
while our traditional prevention systems remain stubbornly
offline, online environments are
becoming incubators for violence.
We see this manifest, uh, as digital leakage
where young people signal intent to cause harm
through threats, fixation and violent content sharing.
Our current approach misses these critical warning signs
and opportunities to intervene.
This is the key gap that we aim to fill.
We need a trusted system that can intervene early
before online ideation escalates,
and potential spill potentially spills
over into the real world.
Um, the solution we propose in partnership
with the Global Digital Violence Prevention Leader, uh,
moonshot is both innovative and pragmatic.
We are bridging the online detection
with offline community-based support.
The most strategic part of our proposal is
to leverage the expertise
of the existing family violence sector.
This sector is an underutilized prevention infrastructure
staffed by practitioners already working with young people
and trained in a very skills needed for this work.
Emotional regulation,
trauma deescalation, and behavior change.
By providing additional training to
and adequate resourcing for this existing workforce,
we can create a national secondary prevention network
that addresses these risks directly.
This is a practical cost-effective solution that aligns
with the committee's aims for
proportionality and workability.
In closing, we have an opportunity
to move from a reactive model
to a proactive preventative one for online harm
and violence prevention.
By investing in a community-based approach,
we can build a world leading system that meets Ranga Tahi
where they are and provide them with the support they need
to thrive both online.
Inline. Thank you.
Thanks very much. Are there
any questions from the committee?
No, there don't. Doesn't appear to be any questions.
Uh, thanks very much Lee, appreciate the time you've taken
and present to the committee and for your submission.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, we're now going
to the New Zealand Game Developers Association on Zoom
with chair, um, Carl
Koto. Um, I think
Carl is still trying to get in,
so perhaps we give him a moment.
Um, to introduce myself, my name is Joy Keen.
I'm the executive director at the New Zealand Game
Developers Association.
Uh, and Carl, who you're expecting is, um, our chair.
So if he's not here,
Here he is. Great.
He's wonderful.
Um, so we've got 10 minutes with you this afternoon,
including any time for questions hand over to you.
Great. Um, joy, I think I,
I may have missed your slight introduction,
but Kiara, uh, my name's Karl LeDuc.
I'm the chairperson of the New Zealand
Game Developers Association.
I also work as a senior games producer, uh,
for Christchurch based Game Studio Cerebral Fix.
Um, I'll hand it over to Joy for a quick intro
and then we'll talk some.
Thanks Carl. So one thing that we would like to, um,
draw a clear distinction between video games
and gaming platforms.
I noticed Roblox was actually, uh,
brought up a little bit earlier and it has been a
topic of the news recently.
Video games are individual creative works designed
and developed by studios.
The developers control the gameplay, the story,
the mechanics, and the player experience within the game.
But platforms such as Roblox are not themselves video games,
they are distribution
and engagement platforms where many different games
or experiences can be created and played.
The key point is that the control overplay, safety,
moderation and data is not in the hands
of the game creators, but it sits
with the platform itself, IE Roblox.
So while a developer might design a game within Roblox,
they do not set the moderation standards, parental controls
or community rules.
Those are determined and enforced
or not enforced by Roblox as the platform.
This distinction matters
because when we are talking about online harm
or safety for children and young people, it is the platform
that has responsibility for the systems, the tools,
the protections, not the individual developers of the games
that, that are hosted on it.
So we wanted to make that clear distinction for you so
that there's no confusion between a platform, light, Roblox,
and games that are made in New Zealand.
Thank you, joy. And, um, just in addition, we,
we strongly advocate for better practices, uh,
in the industry and we're happy to work with the government
to build, uh, these initiatives
and improve the digital literacy, um, in our,
in our country, in our industry.
Uh, but, uh, thank you for your time.
We'd love to take any questions. Na, mihi.
Great. That's a question from Reuben.
Thank you. Um, thank you for that
and thank you for your submission.
Um, do you have any, you've spoken about
that important distinction between gaming and platform.
Do you have any members that
fall into the platform category?
Uh, I would say, I would say no, uh, no, uh,
not platforms themselves,
but there are definitely features that specific games, uh,
can, uh, have such as, uh,
voice activated communication or online multiplayer games.
Um, that is, uh, usually
focused though on the larger studios
and the kinds that aren't really, um, that,
that don't exist in New Zealand.
Um, even our larger studio, uh, path of Excel,
or sorry, grinding gear games that develop path of Excel,
uh, don't have, uh, these kinds of features in them.
So we're talking like the call of duties, the, uh,
uh, the destinies.
These are, you know, large massive
studios that are based overseas.
Yeah. And just a supplement with your permission chair.
Um, the, are there, are there initiatives
and active conversations within the members of your
association around self-regulation best practice?
But how's that, how does
that happen within your organization?
Absolutely. I think, um, I, I would love
to answer this joy.
Um, the, the studios
that develop games are definitely beholden to the platforms
that they publish on, and the majority of our
studios in our members, uh,
develop on either the Steam PC platform
or on the, uh, Android or Apple, uh, games platforms.
And so they have the strict rules, they have the terms
of services that need to be abided by,
and that's where the conversations tend to revolve around,
uh, certain terms of service, uh, requirements that, um,
that might need clarification amongst our members in order
to have their games released on these platforms.
Cool. Thank You. Thanks very much Francisco.
Uh, thank you Chair. Um, you, you've mentioned that, um,
we don't feel like, uh, you know, the, the regulations
for social media shouldn't necessarily apply for, um,
the gaming companies.
Um, but are there any regulations that you feel like
would enhance the, um, you know, the quality of life
for young people and parents
that would apply to the gaming sector?
I'll, um, answer this if you like Carl.
I don't believe so.
Francisco, um, one of the, one of our points around,
uh, the safety of children online is that it actually needs
to be a partnership between the platforms, the parents,
and of course game developers will do whatever they can do
to help support and make sure
that things are child friendly when
they're making games in that space.
And as we said before, as Carl alluded to, we are beholden
to the, um, the rules
and regulations of each of the platforms.
Thanks. Um, Francisco, just a question from me in terms
of the, uh, distinction
between developing a game here in New Zealand
and developing one overseas.
So as I understand it, as developers,
if you develop it here,
you would get an age classification for your game.
Is that correct? Yes.
Yet you've got correct, you, you've,
you essentially compete against games created overseas
that may be sold here, um, online,
not in physical copy, if I'm correct,
that don't have an age rating.
You are absolutely correct on that. Absolutely.
So to give you a a little bit of perspective,
New Zealand game developers, uh,
last year made $548 million.
That was export earnings.
Domestic sales were only $16 million.
Now, the other side of that, the gameplay side of that is
that in 2023 New Zealanders spent
$708 million on video games.
So when you look at the number of games
and the coverage of games
that people are playing in New Zealand,
what New Zealand developers are making is a very small part
of what's actually being consumed.
Can you give us those numbers slowly again?
So $708 million spent
by New Zealanders on games in 2023.
That's correct, yes. Yeah.
And the other couple of numbers there,
Uh, the other numbers were in the, I actually said 25,
I meant to say the financial year ending 2024.
Okay. New Zealand game developers earned $548 million,
$16 million of that was domestic sales.
Right. Thank you.
Um, any other questions?
Thanks so much for the time, uh,
you've given us this afternoon.
We very much appreciate it.
Um, and yeah, thank you
and, uh, I appreciate the time
for taking to submit to the committee.
Thank you so much, AMI. Thank
You, AMI.
Now, uh, we have the children's commissioner here in person.
Um, we're gonna invite you straight up, uh, to cheer with us
for 10 minutes, including time for questions.
As children's commissioner
and the independent advocate for all
children in RO in New Zealand under the age of 18,
and all children and young people under, uh, under the age
of 25 who have been in or who are in care and or custody.
My mandate and functions are governed
by the Children's Commissioner Act 2022,
and I'm supported in my work every day by my team at
our vision that we are working to every day is that all
and in New Zealand live their best lives.
In my view, this inquiry into the harm
that young New Zealanders encounter online in the roles
that government, business
and society should play in addressing those harms is
really, really important.
The comprehensive nature
of my written submission reflects this.
So I very much welcome this inquiry
and I want to acknowledge all of the children
and young people around our country who've taken the time
to share their views through their written submissions
and the ideas and experiences that they have shared.
I acknowledge and strongly welcome
that the select committee has today heard directly from a
number of children and young people over the country
and I to them and all those Ana who you may still yet
to be here from, for their wisdom that they are bringing
to your consideration of these issues.
The voices and views of Moana are the most important voices
and views to inform this inquiry because it is their lives
and their realities that the findings of this inquiry will
directly impact the most.
They are wisdom holders about their lives
and they often have solutions that we
as adults might not always think of.
For those who are under 18,
they are also at a democratic deficit without the
enfranchisement of being able to vote.
And this is another reason why it is so very important
that inquiries such
as this hear directly from Moana themselves.
I note the range of lived experience
and views that Moana have
and are sharing about, uh, these, their solutions
to preventing online harm for other Moana in our country.
And as the children's Commissioner, I encourage you
as members of this committee to, to listen carefully
to their solutions, to their experiences,
and for these to inform your decisions about this inquiry.
It's also timely that I'm speaking with you today
because it is the first day
of child safeguarding week here in Al in New Zealand.
And this year the focus is on child safety online
and parenting in the digital world.
The digital world is an integral part of the lives of Ana.
It's part of how they engage
and connect, uh, with others, with the world around them,
how they access information services and supports
and how they play and learn.
For some children and young people, it's integral
to their identity and it is where they find their community.
And yes, like the majority of submitters
who you have heard from today, the digital world, uh,
like the offline 3D world, is absolutely a place
where harm is encountered by children and young people.
As my children's rights colleagues at the Five Rights
Foundation and internationally leading NGO working in this
area states the digital world was not designed
for children, but it can be.
I'd add to this that in order
to support moana's safety in the digital world,
it must be designed with
and for them keeping their rights, including their safety
and participation.
Absolutely central. In the remainder of my time
with you today, I'd like to hone in on three key points.
Firstly, that children are rights holders
and are active participants in the online world.
We need to regulate it for them, with them in mind, working
with them to shape solutions and to prioritize
and hold central their rights,
interests and their wellbeing.
And this does include both their safety
and their participation.
Secondly, the duty barriers here are government business,
especially tech companies and adults.
And thirdly, Moana must be part of developing solutions
to prevent online harm.
This includes initiatives to educate and empower us all
and to make the online world a safer space for Moana,
including the youngest among us, sorry, actually for all
of us, including the youngest among.
So firstly, I'm advocating for this inquiry
to embed children's rights by design in the digital world,
despite children comprising one in three internet users.
Online spaces are predominantly designed for adults
and often failed to meet the needs
and rights based on children's rights,
including the UN convention on the rights of the child.
General comment 25 from the UN Committee on the rights
of the child, uh, has established 11 principles,
which are emerging as the foundation on which
to build a digital world
that upholds children's rights as well as safety.
These principles include age appropriate services, privacy,
equity and diversity, best interests, wellbeing
and full development, consultation with children,
child participation and agency in the commercial world,
and business accountability.
Applying children's rights is a powerful tool when it comes
to considering online harm,
and I believe that this is an essential tool
to guide the committee's thinking about, um, the impacts
of the online world on children's rights and wellbeing.
Secondly, I emphasize that responsibility for the prevention
of online harm, uh, in children's lives rests
with government, with business, and with adults.
The responsibility
to protect Moana from online harm must not
rest on their shoulders.
Sure, they have a role to play
to keep each other safe online,
but the primary duty bearers here are government, business,
and the adults in their lives.
And as committee members are well aware, I'm sure
algorithms, persuasive design, rapidly evolving AI
to name just a few features are among some
of the harmful intentional mechanisms being employed
by tech companies that are detrimentally impacting Ana.
Here in our country, a much stronger focus is needed on
regulating social media companies, for example,
and holding them to account for the harm
that they're causing children in our country.
New Zealand has not done enough in this regard,
and there is a significant opportunity for the government
to regulate these companies
and hold them to account for the harms that they're causing.
And thirdly, I advocate for listening to Moana
and prioritizing education
and supporting them to equip, uh, to be equipped
to navigate their digital environment safely.
I reiterate that mouna are active participants in the
digital world, solutions
that come from their lived experience and ideas,
and that are informed by their rights, other solutions
that are most likely to work to keep them safe online.
And as one young person told me just last week when we were
discussing this copa, rather than banning us from being part
of it, help us to learn, be safe, and navigate it.
Work with us to find solutions to the realities
because it can be positive for us.
Some solutions that Moana have shared,
including in the hearing today.
Um, hearings today, which I support to prevent online harm,
include comprehensive education about the digital world
for both Moana and Whanau,
and for this education to be age appropriate
and continue throughout childhood
and adolescence, more robust content moderation
and actual accountability for tech companies
and social media platforms, digital wellbeing programs
and promotion of positive content, accessible
and supportive ways to seek practical support
and responses when feeling unsafe or uncertain online
and proactive consideration of children and their rights
and their views, and the development
and application of new digital technologies,
including artificial intelligence.
As children's commissioner, I want
to see all Moana in our country safe in the online
and offline world.
The way that we can achieve this is
by giving appropriate consideration to all of their rights
and working to implement solutions that are shaped
by Moana themselves
and partnership with government, business and society.
We all have a role to play in this.
Thank you, Vanessa Winer. Thank
You, Mr. Chair. Um,
a number of submitters have given us some, um,
practical solutions and ideas,
and I'm just, um, wondering if any
of these fit into your quite, um, general sort
of recommendations.
For example, um, an algorithm blocking
or, um, preventing the use of infinite scrolling, um,
as two examples, um,
and enabling, uh, transparency of
what algorithms are used.
Do you think that would come into any
of your recommendations?
I think that we have to, um,
be really intentional about looking at all
of those harmful mechanisms
and the persuasive design that is
so intentionally being built into online spaces
and targeted at children.
Mm-hmm. And these are exactly, um, examples of the kinds
of things that I want
to see these tech companies held to account for.
Um, and, um, that they actually take a different approach so
that these things are avoided
because we know that they do harm children and young people.
Thanks so much. Uh,
that's all we've got time for this afternoon.
Um, so appreciate you coming, presenting to the
Thank you. Thank you.
Um, we are now moving to the mental health
and wellbeing mission, uh, with us in person as well.
Thank you for joining us. We've got 10 minutes
with you today, including any time for questions.
So hand straight over to you.
Thank you very much for your time.
Um, Ella Cullen Cullen, director for System Leadership Data
and insights at, um, mental Health and Wellbeing Commission.
And I've got Katie, she here with me today.
She's principal advisor, um, from the team as well.
So yeah, just thank you again for the opportunity to present
our al oral submission.
Um, today to the select committee.
We do welcome the aims, considerations
and approach to this inquiry and, um, the sort of actionable
and, uh, solutions that will come out of this.
Um, in terms of online harm today,
we wanna build on our written submission, um, to emphasize
that taking a nuanced approach through regulation,
education, and engagement with young people
to addressing online harm is needed.
So I'm just gonna go through a few points
and Kate's gonna speak, um, as well.
So the, what we do wanna see, um,
we wanna see long-term solutions from government not need
jerk reactions from a mental health perspective.
If we want to see improvements to mental distress
among young people in New Zealand, we do need
to more broadly address the root causes of mental health
and, and wellbeing, and invest in longer term solutions.
We believe that social media is not to blame
for a rise in mental health issues among young people, not,
nor is it their sole cause
of youth mental health challenges.
A causal link between the two has not been evidenced.
What the correlational evidence does suggest is not
that social media, social media use itself predicts
or causes depression or anxiety,
but that young people who already have these challenges use
platforms more often or in different ways,
um, from their peers.
What happens online happens offline for young people.
So we acknowledge that young people are being exposed
to harmful content that does
impact negatively on their mental health.
However, we think that coercive solutions
that takes a one size fits all, all approach designed
to control behavior will not work for most young people.
It may, in fact be more harmful.
What matters is how whanau families, businesses, government
and society supports, uh, young people.
How they do that to navigate these spaces, which is
what inquiries about, while preserving the connections
and support networks that young people will continue
to build online As a commission,
we've heard directly from young people about
what supports their mental health
and what takes away from their ability to be well.
Um, these, again, always point
to the root causes of mental health.
So they've told us what government should address,
which is creating a future for young people that is hopeful,
supporting positive life transitions,
addressing climate change,
or ensuring that the gap between those that have
and those that do not have gets much smaller.
And they've also called out for safety online
in terms of solutions.
Uh, broadly as a commission,
we support evidence-based approaches
to online safety for young people.
Um, and what we can see is that there is no evidence
that social media platforms are having a material
developmental impact on the wiring of young people's brains
to cause this mental ill health.
Um, we as a society
and government have a role to mediate any fear
that's being fueled
and that parents are primed for when it comes
to their children and their safety.
We simply do not know enough
yet about some the material impacts of social media use
directly on mental health.
So we also want to see a lot more research
invested in this, into this area.
Young people are talking about their mental health more
and more, which is a positive thing.
And what we really need are more services
to address their needs.
So the commission supports stricter moderation, policies,
content online.
Uh, we also wanna see businesses designing algorithms
and platforms that are age appropriate
and have young people in mind.
Um, we don't support age-based restrictions
or bans, um,
as we have not seen any evidence of their effectiveness.
Uh, we also potentially think that a ban might backfire,
just knowing, know what we know about adolescent behavior.
Thank you. I'm gonna hand over to Kate who will cover points
that she's heard directly from Yeah.
Engaging with young people in a role. Thank you.
Um, all good. Bless you.
I was trying not to sneeze and cough before. Only one.
Um, first and foremost, solutions must be designed
by young people for young people,
particularly those most impacted by online harms.
Um, what we've heard is that young people want to learn how
to recognize, avoid,
and respond to risks, not just face block, block content.
So this means, and I know you've heard it, uh,
all day today, and embed digital literacy
and mental health awareness into the education curriculum
as well as life skills and critical thinking.
And it's really important that this education starts
as soon as possible.
Um, we note the anxiety, stress
and frustrations of parents of whanau,
and we really wanna see, um, more sufficient education
and support, uh, support for parents
to understand these online spaces first and foremost,
but also to be able to have safe
and nonjudgmental conversations with young people
to prevent online harms and intervene early if needed.
Um, young people we spoke to were very,
very clear about holding social media giants
and online platforms to account.
Um, and we desperately need to see rigorous regulation
and genuine safety mechanisms in place.
Um, we also want to ensure that platforms prioritize safety,
rights and health over profit.
Um, as part of this, we really want to ensure
that any changes, any decisions that are made,
also compliment wider mental health.
We reforms, so this means increased investment in services,
culturally appropriate care and prevention strategies
that are grounded in lived experience, leadership,
human rights, and equity.
Hopefully we talked fast enough so you can hit us
with some questions, mark.
But yeah, thank you Chair.
I just, um, just wanted
to challenge your statement about you see no, um, no direct,
uh, evidence of harm caused by social media.
We've had, we've had educators, um, we've had, um,
pediatric experts, we've had other subject matter experts,
and they talk about cognitive impairment.
Mm-hmm. They talk about depression, anxiety, suicidality,
sleep destruction, vulnerability of adolescent development,
attention diver diversion, learning disruption.
And, you know, and,
and I've got a lot of, uh, expert, uh, knowledge
I'm struggling to reconcile.
You say there's no evidence
and we've got people that are subject matter
experts. What are your thoughts on that?
That's based on, so I guess, um, there's a lot
of correlational studies
and there's, um, I believe,
and the research that we've done,
there's no causal inference, so there's nothing really
to suggest that any amount of social media use
that directly causal predicts, um,
mental health impacts.
So you disagree with the, um, large meta analysis
that have been conducted worldwide that, um, show
that there is, um, not just on the basis of, um,
correlational, but there's good evidence for, um,
causal, um, mechanisms,
especially when you have a withdrawal effect
that's positive even after a few days.
I, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not discounting that,
that research, but what we've, what we've,
what we can see is that there is still a lot
to be researched and there's still a lot
that we can learn about the causes, the direct causes.
Sometimes the narrative as well is
that social media is causing a rise in distress.
And it's so much more complicated
and more complex than that.
Social media is a part of it,
but it's not the only reason, you know, it's, it's cost
of living, it's uncertainty about s it's life transitions.
There's so much going on in young people's lives
that it's not just this one thing.
Just thinking.
So you have emphasized a lot on including youth voice.
Mm-hmm. And we have heard from some submitters,
young submitters, those who really value being online.
Uh, I want to, uh, know, what would you say to someone
who believes that only adults know what's best
for young people?
Because that kind of comment did, uh, come up this morning.
So what would you say to that kind of comment?
I mean, young people are experts in their own lives.
I think age isn't a good barometer for
what you do know, what you don't know.
You know, generations today are being brought up in this
digital environment, and so it's only right that we listen
to them and echoing the children's commissioner
before children and young people have rights.
And it's important that we uphold and respect those rights.
Damien, very briefly, thank you.
I mean, in areas of, of, uh, drug alcohol addiction
or mental health and wellbeing, um,
how effective is education?
It's incredibly effective.
I mean, we would recommend, first
and foremost a harm reduction approach.
We know that prohibition, categor,
categorically just does not work.
And so taking a harm reduction approach to this
would have much more positive
benefits for generations to come.
And it's what we'd say for alcohol and other drugs as well.
And the core component of that would be education.
Absolutely. Thank you very much
for the time you've given us this afternoon.
Thanks for coming to us, um, face to face. Welcome.
Have a good afternoon. Now I've gotta invite, um,
the Classifications office team.
Um, we've got 10 minutes with you this afternoon.
Thank you for coming and seeing us, um, face to face.
Um, I'll hand over to you, including any time for
Questions. Oh,
good afternoon. Thank you.
Uh, good afternoon, members of the committee.
I'm Caroline Flora.
I'm the chief sensor, and this is Rupert Ab Hanson,
the Deputy Chief Sensor.
We're going to take our submission as read.
We lead the classification office.
We're an independent Crown entity responsible
for classifying entertainment
and forensic content for possible restriction or ban.
We also have a statutory role to conduct research
and engage with the New Zealand public.
We do not have a policy or advocacy role, and
therefore we have not provided the committee
with recommendations for policy reform.
Rather, you sought relevant research on the topic
of online harm for young New Zealanders.
And that is what we have provided.
Our research is recent youth focused and evidence-based.
So if the committee prefers, I can speak to elements
of our submission or our work to prevent
and mitigate online harm.
Otherwise, we are just happy to engage in a discussion
with you and answer any questions you have.
I think we'll take as read and take the second option.
And then if there's anything you feel to add,
feel free to do it along the way.
I wanna ask the first question. We've heard a little bit
about classifications in this challenge
of social media platforms, for example, um,
not having an editorial role, so
therefore you can't give them a classification.
Is there anything stopping us changing the framework in
New Zealand to say, um, you classify
the platform based on what it allows access to
or what is likely to be seen on that platform
to give parents, um, an understanding of an age rating,
for example, of apps or whether they be games
or, or apps online?
It's a great question. So in the current legislative
framework that we work under,
we classify individual pieces of content, so appreciate that.
Not systems. Um,
I'm sure DIA will give you some great advice on
what is happening overseas though.
And so Europe, Australia, uk, um, are all looking at exactly
what you've talked about.
Yeah. Um, I met with some of those regulators last week.
Some of their codes require full age verification
for R 18 content, for example pornography.
Uh, so they are working on embedding those, um, assurances
into everybody's daily life.
You have to be 18 to access it. So
I appreciate that. My question,
I suppose more is, you know,
I had date night last night, went to the movies with my wife
that had a age, you know,
classification on the movie.
Is there anything in your professional opinion
stopping you fulfilling that sort
of function if the framework,
the legislative flame framework, gave you the job of doing
that around, for example, saying,
here's an age rating on Facebook.
Yeah, I mean, we don't have that mandate now.
There's nothing stopping you giving a a mandate,
but that would be on a system.
And, and the reason I mentioned the international examples
is that they have graduated different types
of platform depending on the type of content they hold.
Yeah. So a porn dedicated site is R 18. Yeah.
Social media's not because it has some harmful content,
but it's not R 18.
So they've put in different approaches to this issue,
but you could, you could do it.
So, so you've, yeah. Okay. Yeah, I think that's answered it.
Mm. Ruben,
Thank you. Um,
we have heard quite a lot today about, um, porn
and some of the damage that that's causing and,
and the ease of accessibility.
And just looking in your report, you've got a, um,
research that you carried out in 2018,
and then you've got further research
that was carried out in 2020.
But one of the other things we've heard about is, um, and,
and we we're very conscious of is the rate
and speed at which the digital
and online environment is shifting
and changing by virtue of the technology,
but also the platforms.
Um, do you have
more contemporary examples of, or, or,
or findings or research as well in that specific area
On porn?
Yeah. No.
So we did three years of research on porn
and look porn leaped out
of our regulatory landscape more than 10 years ago when DVDs
stopped being imported into
New Zealand and everything went online.
We don't have a mandate to regulate online spaces.
However, what I would say in all
of the research we have done since then on body image,
on online misogyny and violent extremism,
and more recently on, uh, extreme content
that young people are seeing, porn always comes up, uh,
whether it's extreme porn
or it's, you know, other porn young people, it is a,
it is a contemporary issue that young people are willing
to talk to us about when we conduct this research, uh, about
how it makes 'em feel about their bodies, about
how it comes up when they weren't looking for it.
Some really extreme examples
that may actually in fact be objectionable are
all in, um, the space.
We would welcome someone
to repeat the research that we've done.
Um, but, um, we have no more tools, I guess,
in our toolkit than we did then to respond to it.
Yeah. Okay. Thank You, Mike. Patrick,
Uh, thank you Chair.
Just, there's a, there's a, a fair bit of,
um, existing legislation.
Uh, do they have enough teeth, could they be strengthened?
And then do we need a, a stick approach as well?
Because, you know, we've got the, uh, the Crimes Act, uh,
we've got the Broadcast Act,
unsolicited Electronic Messages Act.
We've got the Harmful d,
the Harmful Digital Communications Act, the films, video
and publications classification act.
There's quite a bit of legislation there,
which we hear from a number of submitters that it's, um,
it's flagged, but it's not enforced.
Um, I think what I would say is the system is not broken.
All of those pieces of legislation, all of the people
who operate it are doing great things
to prevent online harm.
There's just a really big gap.
There's no one who has a mandate to systemically, uh,
regulate online platforms like the, some
of the other overseas jurisdictions are doing it.
And so we provided a little map of that in our Yeah.
Submission. So it's an extra tool, not a replacement for
what already exists, which you are.
Right. There's lots of things we can do, and we do do. Yeah.
So like, uh, uh, in, um, online digital regulator mm-hmm.
With teeth, with teeth,
that doesn't exist in New Zealand at the
Moment. Yeah. But could
There be, it could be, it would have
to be built from scratch and new legislation
introduced to give them that mandate. Mm-hmm.
Um, appreciate that you don't have a policy function.
Um, and, but, but I'm sure in working
or speaking with your colleagues internationally,
you have some, I, some, you know, more than some idea
of the roles they play in their, their countries.
If you had a similar role in, um, uh,
countries that we would normally compare ourselves to,
what would be in your job
that's not currently there here in New Zealand?
So we regulate content.
Online harm is bigger than content. Yeah.
It's communications, it's scams, it's grooming,
it's addiction and all of those types of things.
So you take all of those things together firstly. Yeah.
But the tools that we don't have are
requiring, um, age assurance.
Yeah. So keeping kids away from porn
or, uh, keeping, uh, illegal content away from everyone.
Um, we don't have transparency requirements on the platform
so that they don't have to tell us
what they're doing with algorithms.
Um, so that's what other nations are implementing,
whether they're doing it through a ban
or whether they're doing it through codes, um,
that require platforms to provide this information.
That's, those are the tools that we don't have.
The tools that we do have though are impactful,
classifying illegal content, getting it taken down, uh,
providing a lot of education
and resources to people
so they can make their own informed choices about
what they do online.
There's just this bit in the middle that there's,
And so to clarify that bit that you've just referred to
and other jurisdictions would sit in your role?
I don't think so, no. Okay. To be honest,
we are a censorship function with quasi judicial.
Yeah. Um, those roles might sit quite
uncomfortably together.
Right, okay. When we make a decision on a piece of content
that can form large part
of a criminal charge and send someone to prison.
So you probably wanna keep them apart, so
Your the role you Yeah.
Yeah. So the role you play predominantly internationally is,
is very similar regardless of jurisdiction.
Like if you were looking at a comparative job
to yours jurisdiction,
There are actually very few countries that have, uh,
roles, ssi, digital roles like New Zealand has right.
In, in the censorship regime. Okay. Ours is beautiful. Yeah.
Uh, it's quick, it's responsive and it's efficient
and it stops the courts getting clogged up
with all of this awful content.
Yeah. Um, it's not the same as systemic regulation. Okay.
Yeah, that's good point. Good to appreciate actually.
Yeah. Any other questions from anyone?
Please open anything you feel like you wanted to say today
that we haven't asked you?
Um, look, I think it's, the research
that we do supports a lot of what you've heard today in
that young people actually do have the solutions, the things
that they tell us consistently.
Uh, they don't want to see a lot of this content,
but they don't do anything about it
because they're scared of the repercussions.
And consistently what they ask
for are supportive conversations, education, um,
and non non-judgmental conversations.
And I, and I guess I would encourage the committee
to also have a look at what Youth Parliament came up
with themselves, uh, a couple of months ago.
If I were to design the system, I would give them,
I would've done it the same way.
They said they want more education on online
safety for young people.
They want updated regulations.
All of the acts that you just mentioned, they want them
to be reviewed, and they want all of that done informed
by young people with a youth advisory panel
or something to your process.
So it was really that simple, not simplistic,
it was just simple and beautiful.
So I'd invite you to have a look at it.
On that note, I wanna ask a final question.
So I appreciate that.
That might, um, work, for example, engaging a 14
or 15 or 16-year-old.
Right. Um,
but say a 10-year-old,
is there an age at which it should be banned?
Um, from a, from a, um, access to social media
that might not be 16?
I couldn't tell you that There's content on there
that's kittens and puppies.
Yeah. There's contents on there
that's illegal and not for anyone.
Um, and like I said before, social media is bigger
than just content.
The other thing I would say is our research shows us
that young people are accessing extreme content on
lots of different platforms.
Yeah. And sometimes they're being sent it
or they're looking it up, and it's not on social media,
it's on gore websites
or porn sites or those types of things.
So as content specialists, we would say it's, it's not
that easy to say that social media is the problem.
I've been very indulgent of myself,
so I'd be, be indulgent of the opportunity.
No, thank you very much. In the brief time I've been here
and listening to submissions, I mean, we've been a lot
that young people should be able
to have input into the solutions now.
I know I was, I was an absolute genius at 15.
I knew everything. Uh, you know, and many do.
And indeed what we are hearing here is we,
we don't quite understand, you know, the implications
of this, and it's happening so quickly.
How can we trust young people
to make the right judgements over something
that we don't know the full implications of it?
Therefore, should we take a precautionary
or should we take an open,
somewhat call more liberal approach?
I mean, I would just say talk to young people.
There will be a full spectrum of them as well,
but the, the, the thing is,
they're out there navigating it by themselves now.
And so they will tell you what it's like
and they will tell you what it's like
to try and stay safe online.
You, you did say that they'd come up
with the solutions in Youth Parliament, so I guess it is, is
to do whether we err on the side of their solutions
or some that might be slightly more precautionary, I guess.
Um, I, I wouldn't say that all of of the members
of the working group in Youth Parliament would agree on
what the leg legislative response should be.
They agreed on education.
They agreed that the lead should be updated
and informed by young people.
Some of them were very supportive of the ban,
and some of them weren't, but I think all of them agreed
that they should be in the conversation.
Great. Thank you so much, um, for taking the time
to join us and for allowing us to have a bit
of a dialogue there that was really valuable. All
Good. Thank you.
Thanks. Thanks so much. Thanks, team. Right.
We, um, are now moving to the Chief Victim Advisor, um,
to government, Ruth Money who is online.
I understand it.
Thank you.
Uh, Good afternoon, Ruth.
We've got you for 10 minutes this afternoon, including,
um, any time for questions. So we'll hand over to you.
Thank you. Uh, look, thank you for the opportunity to, uh,
give some further insight into the written submissions.
What I would say is you've had a very long day with, um,
the most appropriate input possible.
So I don't want to regurgitate anything
that you've already heard, nor
what is already in my written submission.
Uh, what I would like to say is that
as the Chief Victim's Advice advisor,
my COPA is all victims.
Um, so while there is much harm happening online
for children, um, it is a lot broader than that.
Uh, but my role is to provide independent
and contestable advice.
Um, I will take my submission as read,
and I do just want to acknowledge
that if we don't get this right, we, we do know
that we have, and quite rightly why we are here,
is there a significant concern around children,
because these outcomes can change their tra trajectory
of life, um, ultimately in a disastrous way.
What I do want to just really ground us in
and be really clear about is
that while there is harm online, there is, um,
I I just wanna be really clear, there is a hideous amount
of criminal violence as well.
So while there is harm, there is rape, sexual abuse,
criminality that our young people are facing on the daily
that we are not, um, responding
to appropriately at the moment.
We have, as you will have heard, um, a very piecemeal,
fragmented, fragmented situation.
Um, so I absolutely tuku this work,
but I do encourage absolute urgency
because we have been talking about it for far too long.
Um, at that point, I think I will throw open to, um,
any questions that the committee will have.
Uh, I do also just want to draw your attention
to this isn't rocket science in terms
of there is some great practice happening
in other jurisdictions.
So if you think about the Internet Watch Foundation out
of the uk, if you think about the great Outta C3 P
or the Canadian, um, child Protection Unit outta Canada,
there is best in class work going on.
That, um, kind of covers the remit
that we need from a protection perspective,
from an education perspective,
from a regulation perspective.
So we absolutely need that multidisciplinary view.
I, I'll throw it open to the committee.
Thanks so much. Um, Vanessa Winnick,
Uh, thank you so much for your submission
and presenting today.
Um, if, uh, you know, we, you mentioned that we've,
you know, spent too long talking about it, uh,
what do you think should be the first thing
that we do if we were to do anything?
What sort of is the area to first attack?
Uh, we need a national strategy that's multidisciplinary,
so we can't just look at this from a ban of, um,
and I'm really, I just wanna be really clear
with the definitions and the narrative that we, um, use to,
it's not just social media, right?
Yes, this is, it is the apps, it's the content.
It's, it's much wider than, than social media.
Um, so yeah, it's certainly, um, setting up
that very tight multi multidisciplinary team so
that we can get something stood up very quickly.
Thank you. And Mark,
and just on that, um, Ruth, in terms of,
because things are just evolving so quickly, right?
So the longer we talk about it,
we'll finally get something in play.
It'll all already be historic at that point in time.
So in terms of what you were just talking about there,
it's needs to be something that's nimble, that can act
and adjust as, as the technologies
and online behaviors change and evolve.
Would that be a fair comment?
Uh, a hundred percent. We need to be agile.
Um, and we also,
and I think that's why that regulation is key,
because a regulator that is not funded by industry,
and at the moment we've got some people that are funded
by industry, um, that are also, you know, doing a job of
reg regulation and, and assistance.
And I think that is a dangerous and slippery slope.
If you look at PornHub, for example, three days ago,
four days ago in the US they've just been fined 5 million US
dollars, um, for not doing the right thing.
So we need to be very careful about the, the PTI
and where this money comes from.
Um, but yes, we need that regular regulatory body to be able
to act very quickly on the new trends,
because like we've heard about today, um,
and in the submissions, the Ranta Tahi will find a way
around things, um,
and technology will, will develop, you know, it was 2022,
I think, when, um, all that porn work came up with that, um,
a recommendation that still hasn't been acted upon.
So we, we are really behind the eight ball here.
Sorry, Ruth, can you just explain the point you were
making about Pornhub's fine in terms of your, like what,
what's the comment behind the statement you just made
just for clarity?
Um, so PornHub, um, huge business, it was, um, taken
to task, uh, many years ago.
Uh, because they claim
that they have a zero tolerance when it came to CSA
or child rate material.
Yeah. Um, what I, and, and they've now settled that
and have been fine, 5 million,
and they will be, um,
there will be some regulatory stuff going on in their lives
for the next 10 years.
Yeah. What I am fearful of though is that if you look at
who is funding work in this space, it is meta
on, there are sponsorships
and funding, um,
arrangements coming from the industry itself, um,
to regulate itself.
I mean, that just just doesn't make any sense. So the
5 million you think was far too small?
Is that the, I was just trying
to see if I was missing a point.
Well, my, my point is that these
platforms are not responsible for regulating.
They, they can't regulate themselves,
they're not going to do that.
Um, and finally the federal government has
said, no, enough is enough.
And they have, you know, met a, uh, horn, horn hub has,
uh, settled with them.
Great. Yep. Rob, just up on that, Ruth,
you are really talking about making sure we don't put the
fox in charge of the hen house. Correct.
Hundred percent. Hundred percent.
Thank up on that, please. Thank you.
Um, I understand that me is, uh, providing some lines
of money to NetSafe who do do a good job, um,
but who also held some events at Parliament around the ai.
Would you consider that to be
a conflict of interest as well?
I absolutely consider that to be a conflict of interest.
Thank you. Yep. Yep.
And Net Safe may do a great job educating people around, um,
some of the issues within, um, the online world, um,
but maybe they don't do such a great job.
People helping people navigate when they have been harmed.
They're not an investigative agency.
The police are the investigative agency.
Now, that's not their fault.
That's the way the HDCA has, um, been created
around the approved agency
and the role within, within that act
that the approved agency can fulfill.
But that's why I'm calling for a, um, a kind of review of
that whole HDCA act.
And, and if I may, Mr.
Chair, so in your view, would it be better
for someone like NetSafe to have, uh,
pure government funding, for example,
rather than industry funding?
Uh, I believe that the governance should come out
of somewhere like DIA rather than a charity.
Um, it seems nonsensical to me that the government would
fund something that could be, um, regulated, uh,
regulated itself.
Thank you, Helen.
Thank you. I just wanna ask about
where you'd go for best practice.
Um, Australia seems the obvious, um, link up that we've got,
but I, I really value your views on where
Yeah. I mean, Australia's
doing some good work and,
and just recently talked about the deepfake nude work
in the AI space.
Um, but what Australia doesn't do as well as, um,
the UK from a IW, uh, IWF, so the Internet Watch Foundation,
best practice, um, and,
and the Canadian Center for Child Protection or,
or C3 P, um, that, that it's, it's multidisciplinary
and it's all joined up
because this is the, you know, people
who are abusing people online are, are connected,
that they're making money out of it.
Right? They're embedding child porn in kitten videos
and YouTube, for example, in games.
So unless we're, unless we have a department, um,
of regulators who are talking to each other
and law enforcement that is talking to each other,
which we don't have right now,
we are missing such a big part, part of the puzzle.
But if you look at those models,
that is an integrated service model.
They also hold
and the, the, um, survivors on the way through.
Thanks so much, um, Ruth,
we appreciate the time you've given us this afternoon,
and, uh, and we are now going to take a break
for our final set of hearings the afternoon.
So appreciate the time you've given us this afternoon.
Members will be back in the room at 20 past four.
Thank
So we have, um, the digital future, um,
Bronwyn Scott online with us.
Apologies to everyone that we're running behind. Um,
hi Bronwyn.
Um, we have 10 minutes with you this afternoon,
including time for questions far away.
Broman Scott talking one,
I'm here today speaking on behalf of Digital Future ro,
a national charity helping Tamari
and Ranga Tahi build the skills
and confidence to thrive in the digital world
through programs like kla for a device
and, uh, outreach work with Kura whanau
and community partners.
We see firsthand the promise of technology
and the risks of getting this moment wrong.
I'm also here with two of my other portay on
the white Taha Digital Equity Network, W Den
and the Digital Equity Coalition alter
or deca, both copaa working towards digital equity
regionally and nationally.
Today, I'll share three simple truths we cannot ignore
if we want to protect young people online.
And then I'll be happy to answer any parti you may have.
Truth number one is that tech isn't going anywhere.
So we need to prepare people, not restrict them.
Let's be honest. Uh, technology isn't slowing down.
We're investing heavily in ai, advanced industries
and digital infrastructure.
That's good. But with the acceleration comes responsibility.
Innovation without inclusion increases risk.
If our people aren't equipped
to navigate digital spaces safely
and critically, we are not building progress.
We're building harm. We must treat digital
literacy as a baseline and not a bonus.
And that includes safety restrictions
won't protect young people.
Bands will just push them into less visible,
less supported corners of the internet.
Ran Tahi will always find workarounds
because they're innovators
and they understand that digital
participation is no longer optional.
It's how they connect with their peers, find part-time jobs,
access education,
and explore identity instead of restricting access.
We need to prepare our people through experience,
guidance, and education.
Put regulation where it belongs on platforms, not on Ranga.
Tahi tech companies must be held accountable for safety
by design, algorithm transparency and default protections.
Until then, our job is
to ensure young people have the skills
to use digital tools safely, critically, and creatively.
Truth too is that harm is not shared evenly.
So protection can't be either.
Research shows that online harm is not experienced equally.
The 2024 University
of Canterbury Youth Digital Wellbeing Research report
engaged over 1300 young people, whanau and educators.
And the findings were clear, those with fewer resources,
fewer digital skills,
and fewer trusted support systems
are more vulnerable to harm.
They also have less access to the education
and tools that could help them manage or avoid that harm.
He told us what they need.
They want support, not surveillance.
They want open conversations with trusted adults,
not judgment, and they want to be part
of designing the solutions that affect them.
We need to listen to them
and work with the groups most impacted by harm online
to co-deliver solutions.
That means engaging whanau, resourcing
culturally responsive programs,
and making sure the supports are relevant, local
and trusted digital wellbeing.
Education must be shaped with communities
not imposed on them.
Truth three is that digital literacy is safety.
So let's teach and fund it like it matters.
The most effective way to prevent online harm isn't new,
it's education.
The stop block and talk framework for digital wellbeing
and safety was deliver was developed here in,
it gives young people the tools
to recognize unsafe situations, take action
and talk to a trusted adult.
This isn't about giving young people a list of rules.
It's about building confidence, curiosity, and resilience.
In the digital world,
digital literacy is a core safety skill,
just like road safety or fire drills.
And we need to treat it that way.
That means embedding digital wellbeing into school
curriculum, supporting whanau
and educators to have these conversations
and investing in the organizations already delivering
this work on the ground.
Integrate digital literacy education into all levels
of schooling, starting in primary, make it practical,
relevant, and ongoing.
So young people are confident, not fearful
in the digital world.
We can't fund AI acceleration.
If we can fund AI acceleration, we must
and can fund digital safety
and inclusion, not as an afterthought,
but as infrastructure to close.
We are racing into a digital future,
but leaving people behind.
And that gap is where harm happens, and it is preventable.
Together we can act on the three things that matter most.
Prepare people through education, not restrict them.
Design solutions with equity at the center
and fund digital literacy as a national infrastructure.
The call to action is simple.
Fund digital safety
and inclusion as furiously
as we fund digital innovation back.
Our young people. Not to just survive in the digital world,
but to stand strong, safe, and smart within it.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak.
I welcome your questions.
Thank you. Question from Ji.
Yeah, thank you.
You, um, said, um, that online harm is an equity issue
and you have a listed some, um, marginalized communities
where you have said that there is harm,
but then there are positive impacts as well.
And we heard from a couple of submitters earlier
that the benefits
for marginalized communities outweigh the risks.
Would you put it that way,
or would you look at it differently?
I see it as balance. Uh, the, the communities that,
um, that aren't, uh,
that aren't able to participate in the digital world as well
as they could, uh, also don't have access
or as good of access to the education that they need.
Um, so to, it goes hand in hand on, on balance.
You need to have access. You need education. Thank you.
Thank you, Helen.
You, um, my question is about, like, I'm hearing you loud
and clear about liability and education,
but what I am hearing in the domestic
and family violence space is about children who are very,
very young, being exposed to things they should never see.
Are you saying that there is no role, um,
for banning in situations where children are maybe as young
as five and six who have been given access to mobile phones?
Um, I'm not saying that outright.
However, education is the best way
and perhaps, uh, perhaps it's not a, a place
to educate the child in that instance,
but to help educate the whanau
So the parent will need education about the dangers.
Absolutely. Thank you, Grant color.
Yeah. Thank you very much for your presentation.
So what do you say to the, the parents
and the many school teachers I've met and
and Educationalists who are, who, who despite your, the,
the concept of education, educating these young people
feel that they need something else.
So that's just not enough. What do you say to that?
The education's not enough. Correct.
Um, I mean,
education alone is never gonna be the complete answer,
but I'm here to, to say
that it is gonna be a huge proponent of that.
Mm-hmm. Um, our teachers, uh, uh,
are expected to do a lot.
Um, and they often
struggle in the digital space themselves.
So I think, uh, including the education of digital safety
and wellbeing, uh,
and the school environment to help both teachers
and students would be the way to go.
Yeah. Thank you very much.
Look, thank you so much, uh, Bronwyn
for the time you've given us this afternoon.
Um, we appreciate you taking time to speak to the committee
Elder now Move to our kids online.
Um, thank you for joining us here in person.
Thank you for having us.
Um, we've got five minutes with you this afternoon, um,
including any time you, uh, give us the questions.
Great. Well, thanks for having us.
Um, we are Rob and Rene Cope.
We released a documentary five years about this topic.
We've got, uh, three, uh, four kids between us, between age
of 15 and 21.
So we researched the f**k out of this when we, you know,
our kids were going through this
and what we discovered was just brutal.
And we started getting principals asking us
to start giving these talks mm-hmm.
Throughout the country. So we started doing that.
Um, I've been doing that for five years now.
I've spoken to over 40,000 parents
and I can tell you just educating is not enough.
'cause that's what they're saying. We
need something more than that.
We did a survey as part of it, of what we do of
over 4,600 parents
and 92.3% of those parents had a little to no idea how
to keep their kids safe online.
Se then went and worked at the Department
of Internal Affairs with their digital violent extremism
team for two and a half years.
She has seen the worst of humanity.
Um, so she will talk to that. Thank
You, Rob.
Tto, tto, tto,
Reen, Ko, and Noah.
Good afternoon everyone. I'm Ra.
Um, as Rob said,
I was at the DIA in the digital violent extremism
team for two and a half years.
During my time, I have seen the worst of what a human can do
to other humans, to adults, to children and to babies
and to animals, and yes, on social media platforms,
on popular social media platforms that are ranata
and tamari on.
Um, I would not put my own children in a room
with people raping babies and children
or skinning animals alive or putting them in a blender
or in front of people as they take their own lives
or with people torturing dismembering or beheading others.
There are so many, many more examples
of this I could give you in much more graphic detail,
but it would take me at least a week of constant talking.
So why are we allowing our children to be exposed
to this content online?
We would never allow them to be exposed to this kind
of stuff in real life.
Why are we allowing under eighteens to be exposed to our 18
and illegal content?
If we accept that our tamari
and Ranga tahi have the right
to be protected from harmful content offline,
then we must extend the same protection online.
This is not about taking the whole internet away from our
tamari and ran Tahi.
Therefore, I believe it is egotistical
and uneducated for anyone over the age of 18
to Christ censorship.
It is about creating digital boundaries
that reflect the same duty of care that we apply offline.
We need to stop passing the buck to platforms
who do not care and innovate to protect our children.
For over 30 years, we've had the internet in our homes
and for over 30 years, it's been mostly unprotective
for our and towards our kids.
Back in the eighties, we used to think it was funny
to type boobs into the calculator,
but all you would see was numbers.
A 6-year-old can spell boobs,
and if they were to type that into Google on their
tablet, they'd get porn.
How did we allow that to happen?
How did we as a society allow that to happen?
There's been a lot of really complex, you know,
solutions thrown around and everyone's saying it can't work
because of this and that, because it is complex,
it's incredibly complex and we can't just fix it
with one solution that fits all.
I wrote a bill at the beginning of this year, um,
which I'm not dunno if it was part of our, um, submission,
I believe it was with four basic
solutions, just as a baseline.
It's not gonna be able to sort out
everything, but it's a baseline.
And here's what it looks like.
Two routers in each home, one that's filtered every home
that has kids, one that's filtered for kids,
and one that's unfiltered and all parents have
to do is give their kids password to the filtered access
SIM card, 18 plus SIM card.
You have to prove your 18 just like you do with alcohol
and tobacco to get unfiltered access to a sim card.
All other sim cards block out all adult and harmful content.
All public wifi should be filtered.
Mostly kids are the ones who use public wifi.
And I don't think there's many of us that need
to go sit at a cafe to watch porn
and then a duty of care on us parents to make sure
that we are putting this stuff in place
and protecting our kids.
It's just a baseline minimum.
Let's just put porn, gore, rape,
torture back behind the counter.
How is it so accessible to every child in this country
who has access to a digital device?
Thank you for having us.
Thanks very much. Time
for one question from Grant McCullum.
Yeah, hi. Um, you talk about these
d few different solutions.
Um, there's obviously a cost associated with that.
How do you think going not only all families would be be
able to, um, afford some
of the solutions you're suggesting? Any comment?
Well, the router in every home, I mean, if you were
to add an extra $5 a month to your internet bill,
that would be covered in, in two years.
So five bucks a month, that's less than a dollar.
You know, it's like a dollar a week,
a dollar something a week to protect your kids online.
The sim card, they don't cost anything.
A couple of bucks for a SIM card,
but a under 18 sim card would just go
through the ISPs internet filter.
So like really simple, like this is baseline, so simple.
And then we can build on top of that
with all the social media and stuff build on top of that.
We, we need a baseline to start with to then deal
with all the complexities of the internet. You, yeah.
Thank you so much, um,
for taking time to present to us today.
Alright. I really appreciate you, um,
sharing your experience with us.
Brilliant. Thank you for having us
show these somewhere for you guys.
Um, we've got a copy of your submission,
but if that's in addition to your submission might
Be great. Thank you. Yep,
Thanks. Thank you. Thank
you. Um,
We've now got retail New Zealand with us,
um, face to face as well.
Thank you very much for having us.
Thanks Carolyn. Thanks Annemarie.
We won. She's so nice for now.
Um, so I'll just cover a couple of quick things.
I, our angle obviously is slightly different around how
to protect the workforce, um, that are in retail.
You know, we are, we're overall, we are supportive
of the aim of the inquiry.
You know, 27% of employees in retail are between the ages
of 15 and 24,
which is significantly higher than the general
population of 15%.
So young people in retail are a high
percentage of our workforce.
Um, worryingly, we have had some workers, um,
reporting in person threats
and just this morning we had on our advice line a retailer
call in from a large retail store where they have a person
that's harassing a young person, they've managed
to trespass them from in store,
but then the harassment carries on online and the store
and the employer can't do anything to keep
that young person safe.
So, you know, with, it's a different angle than some
of the other people that are probably talking to you,
but it's still harassment of a young person
and, you know, difficult environment for them
to then continue to work in
because people that do this sort of, um, harassment
and stalking, they, uh, have endless time
and energy, it seems to be able
to find people and, and harass them.
We had some recommendations to the committee in our, um,
our submissions, so we'll take those with read
and we're happy to answer any
questions in the interest of time. Mark,
Uh, thank you Chair. I'll just see,
um, in your submission you talked about, um,
28, almost 28
and half thousand reports, one line harm of which 15
to put over 1500 were, um, principal five.
Yep. But only 71 being convicted. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
And I've asked this a few times today. Yeah.
Do you think we have enough teeth
in our current legislation?
Well, I think it's probably a couple of things.
One is, uh, maybe there's not enough teeth
and secondly, um, are people aware of the, you know,
can they report these things?
Who to report it to? What's likely to happen?
You know, that sort of process I think is one of the things,
you know, a bit more education to the wider sector around
what needs to actually happen
and then make sure that, um, that the right
agencies have the right teams to be able to do something
and actually they action it. Yeah.
And just to up on that, does it feel, do you have a view
as to whether everything's joined up?
It sort of feels like there's a whole lot
of different siloed legislation and who's in charge of what
and who's then for, so who's the charact, who's the stick?
Yeah, absolutely. Got any comments on that?
Yeah, I did you want to?
No, I I think that it is, uh, too complicated
for most people to, to understand
and really know this is where you go for everything
and who, who will follow up with that stuff.
So would you have a view as to potential one stop shop?
Uh, we wouldn't have a view on who would do it,
but we think simplification would be better in just, uh,
making sure there's good education around
so businesses would know where they would go
and how they would process that
and what protections a worker could get from that sort
of, that sort of incident. Yeah.
Thank you. Yeah.
You mentioned about the situation, uh,
the example today mentioned about Yeah.
Uh, that we harassment that moved to online.
So what does online like kind of mean to you?
What kind of, uh, communication channels
or platforms you thinking when you are talking about online?
Well, we, we talking in this particular absence, it's,
so it's social media, so it's the, the Facebook, the, um,
Insta, that type of thing.
Okay. So it's not like form messaging
or, uh, uh, WhatsApp, uh,
messages you're talking about here?
No. Yeah, it's in a, it's just,
it's in a public space though, right.
So if it's, if it's on someone's Instagram account
or on their, um, their Facebook account, uh,
that's a public form for most people.
Right. And, and you know, someone's got in there
and there's some terrible things being said
and done that are causing stress
and harm to that young individual.
Okay. Um, Ruben, I
Thank you.
Um, yeah, thank you very much for coming in and for,
and for the, um, submission that you've made, point 12,
you talk about a recommendation being to work
with technology companies
to ensure they're preventing and responding to harm.
I guess the question from me is how, how good
or bad has your engagement
with those platforms being to date?
As in how responsive have they been?
And also have you engaged with, um,
equivalent organizations in other countries
around a collective approach?
Uh, retail NZ hasn't, um, taken that step. No.
Um, but certainly in, in my experience
of just trying to get in touch with, um, Facebook,
it's very, very difficult.
And I'm speaking as somebody that kind
of knows their way around these things.
So, you know, for the average employer
or the average person, the young person in particular
that's been targeted by these things,
that it would be almost impossible I think,
to get any kind of response.
Yeah. Um, just going back to the beginning
of the conversation where you, uh, referenced that example
of the employee, uh, being harassed.
Um, are you aware of the stalking
and harassment legislation that's in the pro?
Yeah. Yeah. Would that scenario, in your understanding
be covered, um, by the protections of that new piece
of legislation if it had been enacted already?
It's not in enforce yet, but
Well, certainly I think for the,
for the physical in person stuff. Yeah.
Well, it applies to both is my understanding.
It might be worth just, I'd be interested to see whether
or not, um, having a look at it in the context of if
that legislation was in place mm-hmm.
There would be a pathway, um, for that employer to support
that employee or if we need further strength,
more strengthening of that strengthening.
So happy to hear back from you. That was,
That was certainly part of our submission to that bill.
Yeah. Um, so yeah. Yeah,
We'll go back and have a look and we can come back to the,
that'd be great to just get some feedback on that.
Yep. Cool. Thank you so much for your time this afternoon.
Um, we are now going to Inclusive Art on Zoom.
Sorry for that. Free from stalking. Oh, sorry.
No, they, uh, art are free from stalking.
Um, are not available. Okay. Sorry.
I should have made that clear.
Um, so yeah, we, we go straight from Great.
Um, thank you for joining us online.
We've got five minutes with you this afternoon,
including any time for questions.
Um, I'd like to start by saying
that it is more than just youth who are being harmed online.
There are many vulnerable populations
as well as individuals.
And this isn't just about individual harm.
This is about collective harm
and whole communities that are being harmed.
Uh, banning social media for youth is dealing
with the symptoms and not going into the
root cause of the problem.
Um, some of these are the root causes are platform design,
the way that things are amplified, um, and that harmful
and hateful content is being amplified
because it generates more response and
therefore gets more profits.
Um, addiction by design, which others have spoken of.
Using the latest science, um, to ensure people are addicted
and that they're locked in to particular platforms.
They've built an audience, they might have monetized it,
making it hard to leave.
Um, others exploiting platforms.
So those people that are peddling money
for hate are getting very successful.
And we hear about some of the big ones like, um, Alex Jones
and Andrew Tate, but these people earning millions
of dollars a day, um,
and plenty like them for very, very, um,
extremely hateful contents.
Um, what I'm not sure if anyone has talked about is the
level of, uh, state activity to disrupt online spaces.
And I'm talking of,
and this is research from a few years ago, for example, BJP
and India having a 600,000 troll army of paid trolls,
um, that were moving into international online spaces.
So it's not like they were just active on
Indian, um, spaces.
Um, but so many states are doing this, China, Russia, us,
uh, Brazil, like it's, it's endemic.
And because it's states that are causing harm by design
and in huge numbers, we need a state response.
Um, I think people have talked about fa family violence by
where GPS tracking access to accounts, um, all
of those being hardware and software based.
Um, and in our submission we've put in a list of harms
that we think youth face, um, in terms of solutions.
We need frameworks, um, and systems.
We need an online regulator
that covers the whole broad range of online spaces.
And we need to focus on systems
and not boil it down to individual pieces of content.
Um, we need it to have its focus because we are based
and there's so much of the harm is happening
to our indigenous community in ua.
We need it to be human rights based.
Um, the voices of those who suffer the harm need
to be at the center of the design.
Um, a rights-based approach will mean
that all rights and consider.
And what we are seeing overseas is particular vulnerable
populations are being targeted and silenced online.
And the notion that they're causing harm when
actually it's just an ideological perspective.
And we recognize that happens
and that often solutions end up being used against
marginalized populations most.
So we need those kinds of human rights protections
to make sure that doesn't happen.
We need a national security response.
As I said, this is state level violence being
perpetrated against our system.
We need a national security level response as well.
Algorithmic transparency.
How accurate are the machine learning systems?
What content is being taken down that shouldn't be
because of malicious reporting?
What content is not take being taken down?
Um, voluntary codes do not work.
We have been opposed to the voluntary code
that is in place from the start, um, from
before it was published or even open to submissions, um,
because they didn't center people that were harmed.
They didn't center community. Um, and it hasn't worked.
We have not seen since the code being being in place
that our online spaces are safer.
And in fact, all of the platforms have been firing trust
and safety teams on mass lowering the community standards.
Um, we don't need just regulation, we need enforcement.
There is no point in having regulations if there aren't the
resources to enforce it.
And we need more than just bias.
And finally, we need to be working collaboratively
with other jurisdictions
as this is an international level problem.
However, we have to ensure
that we maintain our own sovereignty.
Not everything that, um, solutions
that are overseas will work here.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, um, for your time this afternoon.
That's all we have time for.
Um, appreciate you taking the time
to present to the committee.
We're now gonna move to our next, um, submitter dm, um,
Imogen Stone from DM on Zoom
Koto. My name's Imogen
and I work at Auckland Sexual Abuse Help
Foundation as the program lead at dm.
Today, I'm speaking alongside two of our young leaders, Tara
and Fiona, who are also joining us on other screens,
and my colleague Ashley.
Um, as we speak to our written submission
and represent both our personal experiences
and those about wider team of young people
and our community, I'd like to start
by focusing on the root causes
and key enablers of harm experienced by young people online.
When we first raised the submission with our team
of young leaders, our conversation was immediately drawn
to the harmful culture that is allowed
to flourish in these digital spaces
where this culture comes from
and how this culture is normalized by poor moderation.
A young person can engage with something harmful, report it
and receive an automated message saying,
this content does not breach the platform standards.
This sets the tone that harmful attitudes
and behaviors are okay.
The issue here does not with the young person
and that harmful content.
The issue comes from a culture that normalizes violence
and harm and is then enabled by inadequate regulation.
Think for a moment of the rape culture pyramid.
This model tells us that tolerating minor harms at the
bottom of the pyramid, like rape jokes for example,
makes it easier to justify more serious ones like cat
calling, stalking, and eventually sexual violence.
This is the type of digital environment our
currently navigating one
where platform guidelines often permit harmful content
and behavior that undermines safety
and fosters more extreme attitudes and behaviors both online
and in the world around us.
Young people must not bear the consequences
of the systemic failure.
They should be uplifted as experts in their own experiences
consulted meaningfully
and supported to co-create the solutions.
I'll now hand hand over to Tata, who will continue to speak
to youth experiences and voice.
Um, Kiara.
So I'm Ada and I'm 16 years old,
so I just wanna set the tone by sharing my lived experiences
to help understand how this, I think this will
actually impact people, like young people.
So, um, to, I wanna relate this to
banning phones in schools.
Um, at my school it was, they were already banned,
but I've seen that
because of the ban,
like using your phone seems like colder now
because people are like, oh my gosh,
I'm breaking the law, I'm using my phone.
So I see like students using their phones more often
and I think it'll be like that for social media as well.
Like personally, I didn't use social media
until I was like 14,
but I think if it was illegal for me to use social media,
I would've used it at a younger age.
And I think that's like true for all young people
because we don't like adults telling us what to do.
Mm-hmm. Like, we want our change to be led by us.
So because we want to be responsible for what we're doing,
because it just makes us feel sad when you guys are telling
us what to do to be honest.
And then if a young person gets into like online harm,
they will, like, who will they go to?
Because they can't go to NetSafe
or any like, anything like that
because they aren't supposed to be on social media anyways.
And, um, I think that, uh,
it's like shifting responsibility on from the young people
and from like the perpetrators
of harm onto the young people,
which is not what we should be doing.
We should be like, we shouldn't say like, to young people.
Stop and like, protect yourself from the evil people.
We should say evil people stop being evil.
So, um, now I'm gonna pass on to Fiona
That's always been so affected.
Kira. My name is Fiona.
I'm here as one of the ambassadors
for DRMI am a current university, um, student
and I'm studying a Bachelor of laws and bachelor of arts.
Um, and I'm here to speak on the importance of education
and empowerment.
So first of all, I think we all share a common objective
that we want to keep young New Zealanders safe from the
overwhelming and incredibly
concerning online harm that they face.
But what is much more concerning is
that when we talk about this harm,
the blame just seems to be put on them.
This is a vicious cycle of victim blaming
where true accountability is lost.
We seem to forget that we are actually talking about young
people when we place the responsibility on them
to be safe online.
It is not our young people's fault that this harm exists.
And placing a ban on social media is not going to get rid
of that online harm.
It's just going to redirect it and prolong it.
Online harm will continue in its
presence regardless of a ban.
An important lesson that my own parents taught me is
that education is power.
And if we really want
to keep young New Zealanders safe from online harm,
education is crucial.
Our priority should not be to punish our young people
for the behavior of others.
It should be to educate them on how to be safe online.
Our focus should be on teaching our youth about
what it means to have a digital footprint, how to
identify unsafe online interactions
and what to do when they do experience
online harm themselves.
This education also needs to possess the ability to adapt
and evolve with the digital world.
Outdated warnings are not going to work,
and our education should reflect the real
and evolving risks that we face in the online world.
To put it simply, the responsibility
to keep our youth safe is on adults.
It should be us putting measures in place
to teach our schools and our parents how to be safe online.
The digital world can also provide so many opportunities
for our youth to just learn how to be safe online.
And by removing our access to this digital world,
we would be doing our youth a disservice
and hindering them from that opportunity to learn how
to navigate the space safely.
Education means prevention, but it also means empowerment.
So I will now pass over to Ashley
who will focus on accountability for platforms.
Hello, my name is Ashley. I work at Dium.
I have a background in frontline sexual violence prevention
and behavioral psychology.
Um, at the moment, the people
that are profiting from our pain
and suffering are the social media companies
who perpetuate it.
They benefit from our engagement with their online services,
and yet we're the ones that pay the price for it.
We know right now that prohibition doesn't work.
It's not an effective intervention technique.
We can look at the history of drugs and alcohol
and there's a, there's a long history there
and we know it doesn't work.
We don't need to rehash that.
Um, automated moderation
and overseas systems are just, they're not working
much like Image said,
we'll just get a message saying that it's fine.
Um, that's not really what we want
to be showing to our youth.
We would quite like New Zealand based moderators
and clearer culturally relevant guidelines.
We want stronger regulations
that ensure real consequences when harm occurs.
People that need to be held accountable.
Our social media companies, they need to be regulated
because they profit from potential harm from youths
and adults alike.
Some of the content that a few
of the other people were talking about that's dangerous
for youth and it's also dangerous for adults.
I don't think anyone should be seeing that.
Um, if companies like this are profiting from us, they need
to be held accountable so
that they invest back into our safety and wellbeing.
'cause they're the ones that are damaging it.
It's tit for tat here.
Um, we think that the things that need to be centered are
constant integration of youth voice and robust guidelines.
It's for us, about us. You need to involve us.
We need to allow education
and legislation
to develop alongside the changing digital landscapes
'cause they're not keeping up right now.
Um, we need better monitoring of adherence
to any new guidelines we put in,
and we need better consequences of not adhering.
To summarize, if we want change, we need
to be targeting the root causes.
Online harm is a systemic issue.
It's not a problem Created by youth.
Punishment should not be falling on youth.
They are not at fault.
Solutions need to center youth voice,
focus on education first and hold the platforms accountable.
Thank you so much for hearing us speak.
I know you guys have been here all day.
Would really like to open it back up
to you guys for some questions.
Thank you. Um, Helen White.
Sorry. Thank you. Um, I'm really disturbed by
what I hear in the sector about the, um,
the kinds of changing norms in terms
of things like rough sex, that violent sex has become
more acceptable
and people are very confused about where the line is cost
'cause of social media and
'cause of how much porn is being consumed
and how extreme it's getting.
Can you comment on that?
I mean, I'm happy to speak to this and also invite the
and Tyler to jump in as well.
Um, I'd be looking to our entire culture, Helen.
I mean, thinking about, um, the music on the radio,
the traditional media we're engaging with.
Um, we've got a normalized culture
that is telling our young people
that rough sex is the equivalent of,
you know, traditional sex.
It's not something that we should be worried about,
something that everyone is engaging in.
And so I don't think the, that social media
or the digital space is the only place to blame.
But that's again, where I come back to
how are we normalizing this culture?
What are we doing in terms of education
and shifting the culture, taking accountability as a, um,
society to open up conversations.
Because at the moment our young people are turning
to social media because that's the only place
that feels safe to have the conversation.
And if we're taking that away from them,
they've got no safe space to navigate this at all. Thank
You. Imagine.
Thank you. Quick, final, quick,
Very quick question for Tara.
I'm just curious, Tara, thank you for your submission.
I'm just wondering as a, I'm a parent, I'm just wondering
what age you think parents should stop being parents
and stop being able to make rules for their children.
Um, I mean, I think that you're never too I'll owe
to ask your mom for permission to do something.
Like I still ask my mom for permission to do stuff.
But like, you can't just put like the responsibility
of stuff to onto parents
because like, like most parents don't know how
to use navigate social media or stuff, anything.
Anyways. So we need to kind of put that onto like,
either we need to educate parents or we need to get schools
and like other people to educate everyone.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you so much for taking the time
to present to us this afternoon.
We very much appreciate it.
Um, we're gonna move on to our, uh, second to last, um,
uh, submission for the afternoon.
So I appreciate your acknowledgement of our day here.
Thanks for presenting.
Now I'm gonna invite, um, alcohol Health watch, um,
who are here in person and online, um, to present to us.
We've got 10 minutes with, um, Lizzie and with Andrew
K Precious.
Uh, Andrew Galloway. I'm the executive director.
I'll pass over to Lizzie, who's gonna be there in person,
but I'll be here to support.
Thank you
Ua. Call Lizzie.
I'm a health promotion advisor making the
submission on behalf of Alcohol Health Watch.
We're a national organization funded
by Tu Health New Zealand.
Our role is to provide credible up-to-date evidence
regarding policy and planning matters.
Our work functions through a health promotion approach
and is therefore committed to reducing
and preventing alcohol related harm.
Firstly, we'd like to thank you for inviting us
to submit on this inquiry
and recognition of the need
to protect Ang Tahi from commercial influences on their
safety and wellbeing.
First person I thought
of when I read about this inquiry was Louise Allen,
an incredible mom who lost her daughter rose
to a lengthy battle with addiction
ultimately resulting in her overdose.
Late last year, Louise bravely shared the role
of alcohol use disorder in their story.
First in the media and then
to the health select committee hearing submissions
on the mental health bill.
Louise wanted this committee to hear
how the alcohol industry's online presence became a part
of this battle by cementing their products into rose's life.
Louise has said, and I think it's worth emphasizing
for a young person already struggling.
This constant targeting was devastating.
As a mother, I watched my daughter be targeted
by an industry that knew her weaknesses better than I did.
The alcohol industry's invasion
of online spaces has been termed limbic capitalism
because it draws on the mechanisms of addiction
to keep users engaged in driving their profits.
Personalized data is used to track people in cycles
of alcohol, advertising, exposure, engagement, and purchase.
Meaning that people who drink more are identified
and more heavily targeted.
Social media also masquerades this marketing
as being peer rather than industry driven,
generating social proof that products are worth buying.
And youth user groups dominate these environments,
making them ideal platforms for the industry
to recruit lifelong con consumers.
Buy now, pay later schemes enable people
who don't have the means to access alcohol.
Then remote delivery can have this at your door within 30
minutes, all of which means
that young people are being manipulated
and bombarded with constant streams of alcohol advertising
that's even more effective than traditional media forms.
Researchers have proven that this advertising is causally
linked to youth drinking earlier and heavier
and increases the risk
of drinking problems when they're older.
But this research is meaningless without action.
For people like Louise
who identify their online environments,
pulled her daughter into a world
where alcohol was constantly in her face as a glamorous,
fun and normal choice.
Needless to say,
this framing contradicts the challenges faced
by many young New Zealanders
who are consistently the most heavily impacted by alcohol
and binge drinking, being normalized
and expected as part of everyday life.
Paired with the massive increase in youth access
to alcohol anywhere at any time
with bottle shops in people's pockets
and extremely poor age verification processes, the need
for action has never been higher,
particularly given the links between alcohol, mental health,
and our disgraceful youth suicide rates.
The industry's online tactics further intensify our culture
of intoxication
and make it harder for young people like rose
to escape cycles of addiction.
It's also a massive gray area for parents
to protect their children,
whereas the alcohol industry has unfettered access
to young people's data
and the ability to control what they're seeing
and interacting with online.
Our written submission recommends several policy measures
that can better protect young people against this
pervasive influence.
However, we also need to acknowledge our current context.
Recent media on the alcohol industry's prolific interference
in shaping our alcohol harm reduction policies, not only
with politicians, but also senior officials is something
that needs to be addressed.
This interference is responsible
for an alcohol regulatory framework
that has repeatedly proven ineffective.
With al tiers recently ranking the worst compared to those
of 11 other high income jurisdictions.
Our industry-led self-regulated advertising policies
contribute to this ineffectiveness, meaning
that alcohol marketing saturates our environments.
A recent study found that children are exposed to an average
of 5.7 alcohol advertisements every day with nearly half
of all exposures from multinational companies.
However, the data was collected during 2014 and 15 and
therefore underestimates online advertising exposure
are not users or consumers.
They're people who deserve all the
opportunities life can give them.
And Tonga, whose rights to education, employment, physical
and mental wellbeing and safety should be prioritized.
Mitigating the alcohol industry's attempts to delay, weaken
or obliterate protective policies is crucial
to effectively reducing the harms they perpetuate online.
Therefore, we strongly recommend setting higher policymaking
standards for ang tahi by regulating donations
and lobbying transparency.
This should involve excluding the alcohol industry from
policymaking to reduce the ongoing impacts
of their conflicts of interest on the effectiveness
of our alcohol policies.
Thank you for your time. We're happy to take questions.
A clarifying question. So, um,
thank you for your submission.
So are you saying that alcohol harm is actually, uh,
more significant than social media harm,
like you put forward alcohol to be considered?
Um, we are saying that there's a need
to regulate unhealthy commodities, uh,
when you're considering protecting young people
from online harms.
Yes, and it's something that's come up
for the World Health Organization, um, quite strongly,
the need to protect children from this exposure on
media, on online media.
Vanessa Wea, thank you chair.
Um, you said that there is, um, causal links, um,
that um, that more exposure to health, alcohol
and harm will increase, um, exposure.
And we had, um, some people try to say during this
that um, there's no causal link for harm, um,
from online sources, whereas you would be saying potentially
that actually through alcohol as a substance that's, um,
exposed online, that's an, a direct causal, um, harm.
Is that what you're saying? There's the direct causal? Yeah.
Well, I mean, advertising is designed
to get people to drink, right?
Yeah. So that link between advertising and then,
and especially with kids engaging with things by liking,
commenting and sharing them mm-hmm.
Has been proven to be more effective at kind of, uh, making
that link between advertising exposure
and then drinking, uh, kind of stronger.
So, and it's also been linked
to hazardous drinking in a couple of different studies, so.
Okay. Thank you. And you also, um, talked about, um, the
ability to sort of buy now, pay later
and have it, um, directly delivered.
Um, what do you think, uh, we, you know,
we should be aiming to try and do?
Should we completely ban it
or should, do you think
that there are age verification things that could work?
Australia's made some really, um, interesting progress
with rapid delivery by introducing a two hour pause
between the point of sale
and then, um, it actually being delivered to people's homes.
Mm-hmm. We think this should be the next day
to reduce harms as much as possible.
Okay. Um, stop people from drinking late into the night
and the kind of violence
and things that have been associated with that overseas.
Um, Andrew, did you have anything to add in terms
of age verification processes and things?
Uh, we realized that this is the education
and workforce committee, but it,
if it does feature in your report the recommendation
to strengthen the sale
and supply of Alcohol Act, um, 2012 could,
could feature it's, we found in our own research, 73%
of orders were delivered without age verification.
The average time 29 and a half minutes
and the shortest time, 17 minutes.
So it's, it's between the marketing online
that we know is causal to, um, drinking hazardously
and the speed at which it can be delivered
and the fact that you don't even need cash, you can tick
that up on easy to get credit as a recipe for, um, for harm.
Totally. Thank you.
I wanna go, um, go back to a point you were making earlier
around essentially the, the need for, um, uh,
the ban on social media.
Um, from appearance perspective, um,
should New Zealand do that?
How do we balance banning social media
with not giving parents like myself the ability to say,
well, it, it's never my problem
because the state's banned it,
it's the state's problem to deal with.
In other words, how do we ensure we
maintain parental responsibility around their children
and simultaneously ban, um, social media
for under 16 year olds?
Um, I'm not sure that the social media ban is going
to be effective just
because in terms of other kind of similar policies,
the enforcement of that is really lacking
and it's really hard to, um, regulate, I guess, um,
and evaluate how effective that is.
But I think that for parents in alter, there's this kind of
gray area between wanting to be a fun parent
and supply kids alcohol responsibly and um, you know,
and then the other thing of trying
to prevent your kids from drinking so
that you can reduce harm, um, our stance on that is that
the later you can put off, um, supplying your kids
with alcohol the better.
Like kids shouldn't be drinking under 18, obviously.
And, um, yeah, I think for parents' responsibility,
that's a, that's very much a cultural thing that our kind
of bans and laws, you know, can help feed into. But
Final quick question, grant. Yeah.
The, um, obviously the, the, for people who need
alcohol companies are making adverts online, you could have,
even if you had a situation whereby they weren't supposed
to be targeting people undergrad, they could be advertising
to the general public and there's nothing
to stop people sharing it into younger age groups, isn't it?
How do you, how do you think you can get that that
that strikes me as a very difficult area to
Yeah, the ideal type
of regulation is a population level one, like a complete ban
because online, uh, online platforms are
like designed for youth, youth audiences,
but then there's also so much at our engagement on there
as well that Thank you.
Okay. Appreciate that. Thank you so much for, um,
appearing for us this afternoon.
Very good. Really appreciate your being. Thank
You. Thank you. Appreciate it
is late in the day
for you all as well, so.
No, that's right. It's all part of the job.
We're now gonna go members to our, um, final, uh, hearing
of the afternoon before we go into private session.
Um, so if I can invite, identify survey
to join us on Zoom
Ano, um, I'm um, just coming to you from Japan.
Sorry, and I was supposed to be inside,
but the meetings run a bit late.
I recognize you're all, um, probably very tired and over it.
No worries, no worries. Thank you,
um, John for being with us.
We've got five minutes with you,
including any type of questions far away.
Excellent. Fantastic. Um, so
of course the reason why we are here is
because, um, we're interested in young
people's exposure to online harms.
And what's so significant to me about that is that we know
that the online environment is a key
side of young people's worlds.
As it was for me when I did my PhD on the topic now over 15
years ago as the research manager at NetSafe,
the online environment is so central
because it provides a range of benefits to young people,
especially adolescents whose main developmental task is
exploring, developing and consolidating their identity.
Of course, identity formation rests upon exploring
what feels right for you, trying things on
and finding a tribe that aligns with your interests.
Most adolescents develop their identity
by learning about things that interest them,
by learning about who they are, by interacting
and forming connections with other people
to form connections with other people.
People need social capital.
They need to know the language of their peers.
They need to know what's popular
and current so they can have conversations
and form connections in the first place.
Media, be it LPs for the older generations.
Cassettes and CDs for gen
or for many young people today is a dominant source
of the social capital for young people.
Until offline contexts overtake the ability of online worlds
to provide the social capital, social fa,
social facilitation
and information they need for their development.
The majority of young people will balance the risks
and benefits and online benefits will win
out for these reasons.
Any abstinence approaches like social media, bans
to online interaction are likely to be ineffective, drive,
use underground and stigmatize young people
for seeking the information and connections they need
for their development Drivers for the current wave
of concern about online harm seem
to be the decline in young people's mental health
and the prevalence of negative interactions
between young people, including cyber bullying
and sexual harm and violence.
Research shows that bawi
and rainbow young people as especially trans
and non-binary young people face high rates of bullying,
victimization, sexual violence and stigma,
and are more likely report not being well supported at home
in their faith communities or schools.
Consequently, aka tap
and ramo young people are less likely report positive mental
health and wellbeing in this context,
data from identify shows that the overwhelming majority
of Taku, tap and rainbow young people still report a strong
reliance on the internet
and social media to support their development.
If we presume that the benefits
of online worlds outweigh the risks for young people,
especially for aka tap
and rainbow young people, then interventions should focus on
preparing young people to navigate those worlds well
and making the environment safer to prevent exposure
to unnecessary risk.
In relation to preparing young people
to navigate online worlds.
New Zealand research shows most young people report not
wanting any more education about online safety.
However, I think the story is more nuanced
and rather than not wanting education per se,
they've mainly been exposed to education
that is largely ad hoc, insufficient,
and full of often one-off reactive interventions
that are largely ineffective pedagogically.
If we are serious about addressing online harm, we need
to provide effective school-based teaching
and learning on digital citizenship and relationships
and sexuality education across the lifespan.
Effective teaching and learning,
however re requires skilled teachers, a comprehensive
and responsive curriculum
and adequate classroom time,
which the current educational priorities on numeracy
and literacy do not always align well with.
In addition, the proposed changes
to the relationships in sexuality education curriculum
exclude mention of trans
and non-binary young people, Maori Pacific frameworks
for understanding relationship and sexuality education
and provide severely constrained content for cisgender type
and rainbow young people compared
to the previous guidelines.
As such, I think the changes
to the RSE curriculum will drive more young people
to seek information and supportive connections online.
And the proposed changes
to the relationships in sexual education curriculum should
be considered in relation to the objectives of this inquiry.
In summary, the developmental benefits of the internet
and social media for the majority
of adolescents exceed the perceived risks of online harms
and abstinence approaches are unlikely to be useful
interventions that need
to focus on making the environment safer
and providing effective teaching
and learning about digital citizenship.
Remember, young people are disproportionately reliant on the
internet and social media for
information about their identities.
And to develop positive social connections
and online harm interventions must
be responsive to their needs.
Thank you.
Thanks so much. Um, appreciate you taking the time, uh,
to present to us this afternoon.
I think we've got time for one question if someone has
a no look.
Thank you John. Appreciate um, the time
as I say you've taken to present to the inquiry.
Enjoyed your Japan. Go.
Thanks, Um, members,
we are moving into private session.
Um, thank you very much.